ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
General Editor: Karl H. Potter 


The following volumes are published: 
I. Bibliography. Sections I and II, 3rd ed. (1995) 
Il. Indian Metaphysics and Epistemology: The Tradition of 
Nyaya-Vaisesika up to Gangega (1977) 
Ill. Advaita Vedanta up to Samkara and His Pupils (1981) 
Iv. Samkhya: A Dualist Tradition in Indian Philosophy (1987) 
V. The Philosophy of the Grammarians (1990) 
VI. Indian Philosophical Analysis: Nyaya-Vaisesika from 
Gangega to Raghunatha Siromani (1993) 
Vil. Abhidharma Buddhism to 150 A.D. (1996) 





ENCYCLOPEDIA OF 
INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


VOLUME VIII 


Buddhist Philosophy 
from 100 to 350 A.D. 


EDITED BY 
KARL H. POTTER 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE LIMITED @ DELHI 


wi L 





First Edition: Dethi, 1999 


© MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED 
All Rights Reserved 


ISBN: 81-208-1553-x. 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 

41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007 
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, Warden Road, Mumbai 400 026 
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004 
Sanas Plaza, 1302 Baji Rao Road, Pune 411 002 

16 St. Mark's Road, Bangalore 560 001 

8 Camac Street, Calcutta 700 017 

Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004 

Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 


PRINTED IN INDIA 


BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS, 
A-45 NARAINA, PHASE I, NEW DELHI 110 028 

AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR, 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED. 
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007 , 


Tevee ORIENTALNI tstavl 





Pr war 


Contributors: 


Stefan Anacker 
Kamaleshwar Bhattacharya 
Bhadanta Santi Bhiksu 
Robert Buswell, Jr. 
Edward Conze 

Collett Cox 

Peter Della Santina 
Bart Dessein 
Nalinaksha Dutt 

Paul Griffiths 

Paul Harrison 
Megumu Honda 
Charles W. Huntington, Jr. 
Leslie S. Kawamura 
John P. Keenan 

Jan Hendrik Kern 
Karen Lang 

Christian Lindtner 
Rajendralal Mitra 
Robert F. Olson 

Paul Pelliot 

Karl H. Potter 
Constantin Regamey 
David Seyfort Ruegg 
N. H. Samtani 
Lambert Schmithausen 
Nancy Schuster 
George Teschner 

K. Timura 

A. K. Warder 

Alex Wayman 

Hideko Wayman 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE xv 

PART ONE: 

INTRODUCTION 

Chapter One: Introduction 3 
Nagarjuna and Aryadeva 11 
The Prajfiaparamita and the Rise of Mahayana 16 
Buddhist Schools and Sects 20 
Theravada in Sri Lanka 28 
The Coming of Yogacara 29 

Chapter Two: The Buddhist Picture of Karma 31 
The Path 35 
Culminating Stages of the Path 41 
Revolution at the Basis 46 

Chapter Three: Categories of Factors 49 
Physical Factors 50 
Mental Factors 53 
Concomitant Awarenesses 62 
Unconditioned Factors 73 

PART TWO: 


SUMMARIES OF WORKS 


1.Satparamita (1st cent. A.D.) 79 
2.Bodhisattvapitaka (1st c. A.D.) 79 
3.Triskandhadharmaparyaya (1st c. A.D.) 79 
4.Katyayanavadanasitra (1st c. A.D.) 79 
5.Astasahasrikaprajfiaparamitasitra (100) (Olson) 79 
6.Ren ben yu sheng jing (100) 86 
‘ 7.Yigie liu she shou yin jing (100) 87 
8.Si di jing (100) 87 
‘ 9.Ben xiang yi zhi jing (100) 87 





viii CONTENTS 


10.Lou fenbu jing (100) 

11.Pu fayi jing (100) 

12.Ba zheng dao jing (100) 

13.Da anban shouyi jing (100) 

14.Yin chi ru jing (100) 

15.Chanxing faxiang jing (100) 
16.Ajatasatrukaukrtyavinodanasiitra (125) 
17.Kasyapaparivartasiitra (125) 
18.Aksobhyavytthastitra (125) 

19.Drumakinnarasiitra (125) (Harrison) 
20.Lokanuvartanastitra (125) (Harrison) 
21.Pratyutpannabuddhasanmukhavasthitasiitra (125) 
22.Dou sha jing (125) 

23.Wenshushili wen pusa shu jing (125) 
24.Siirangamasiitra (125) (Teschner) 
25.Dharmacakrapravartanasiitra (130) 
26.Maitreyapariprechasiitra (130) 
27.Ugra(datta)pariprechasiitra (130) (Schuster) 
28.Chengju quangming dingyi jing (140) 

29.Larger Sukhavativyitha- or Amitabhavyiiha-siitra (150) 
30.Smaller Sukhavativyithasiitra (150) 
31.Ratnagunasamcayagatha (150) 
32.Gandavyithastitra (150) 

33.Madhyamakakarikds (Nagarjuna) (150) (Lindtner) 
34.Vigrahavyavarttani (Nagarjuna) (150) (Bhattacharya) 
35.Stinyatasaptati (Nagarjuna) (150) (Della Santina) 
36.Vaidalyaprakarana (Nagarjuna) (150) (Lindtner) 
37.Yuktisastika (Nagarjuna) (150) 

38.Ratnavali (Nagarjuna) (150) (Lindtner/Potter) 
39.Pratityasamutpadahrdaya (150) (Della Santina) 
40.Suhrilekha (Nagarjuna) (150) (Della Santina) 
41.Bodhisambhara (Nagarjuna) (150) 
42.Vyavaharasiddhi (Nagarjuna) (150) (Lindtner) 
43.Mahayanavimsika (Nagarjuna) (150) (Lindmer) 
44.Catuhstava (Nagarjuna) (150) (Lindmer) 
45.Samadhiraja- or Candrapradipa-siitra (150) (Mitra/Dutt) 
46.VimalakirtinirdeSasiitra (160) (Warder) 
47.Salistambasiitra (170) 

48.Catuhsataka (Aryadeva) (180) (Lang) 





CONTENTS 


49.*Sataka (Aryadeva) (180) (Lang) 
50.Aksarasataka and Tika (Aryadeva) (Lang) 
51.TathagatotpattisambhavanirdeSasitra (180) 
52.Abhidharmahrdaya (Upasanta) (200) 
53.Satasahasrikaprajfiaparamitasiitra (200) 
54.ParicavimSatiprajiaparamitasutra (200) 
55.Astadasasahasrikaprajfiaparamitastitra (200) 
56.Sanmukhidharanisiitra (200) (Anacker) 
57.Jinaputrarthasiddhisttra (200) 
58.Ksemankarapariprechasittra (200) 
59.Mahaldlikapariprechasiitra (200) 
60.Nagaropamasiitra (200) 
61.Nandopanandanagardjasiitra (200) 
62.Puspakutadharanisitra(200) 
63.Tathagatajfianamudra(samadhi)stitra (200) 
64.Vatsasiitra (250) 
65.Tathagatapratibimbapratisthanasttra (200) 
66.Suratapariprechastitra (200) 
67.Maharajakaniskalekha (Matrceta) (200) (Lindtner) 
68.Varnahavarna (Matrceta) (210) (Lindtner) 
69.Sataparicasatka (Matrceta) (210) (Lindmer) 
70.Visesastava (Udbhatasiddhasvamin) (210) (Lindtner) 
71.Prajfaparamitdastotra (Rahulabhadra) (225) (Ruegg) 
72.Kumaralata (230) 

73.AksayamatinirdeSastitra (250) (Kawamura) 
74.Angulimdlikasiitra (250) 
75.Asokadattavyakaranasiitra (250) 

76 ASokarajavadanasiitra (250) 

77 Astabuddhakasiitra (250) 
78.Bhadrakalpikasamadhisiitra (250) 
79.Bhadramayakaravydkaranasitra (250) (Regamey) 
80.Buddhasamgitisiitra (250) 
81.Candraprabhakumarasiitra (250) 
82.Caturdarakasamadhistitra (250) 
83.Dasabhiimikasitra (250) 
84.Dasadigandhakaravidhvamsanasiitra (250) 
85.GarbhavakrantinirdeSastitra (250) 
86.Hastikaksayasitra (250) 


ix 


215 
222 
228 
228 
229 
229 
229 
229 
230 
230 
230 
230 
230 
230 
230 
230 
230 
230 
231 
231 
233 
234 
236 
237 
237 
238 
238 
238 
238 
238 
238 
239 
239 
239 
239 
240 
240 
240 


87.(UpayakauSalya)Jfianottarabodhisattvapariprechdstitra(250) 240 


x CONTENTS 


88.Karunikardjasiitra (250) 
89.Lokanathavyakaranasiitra (250) 
90.Mahavaipulyamirdhardjastitra (250) 
91.MahayanopadeSasiitra (250) 
92.Maitreyapariprechaparivartasiitra (250) 
93.Mafijusribuddhaksetragunastitra (250) 
94.Mafijusrivikriditasittra (250) 
95.Manijusrivikurvanaparivartasiitra (250) 
96.Nandapravrajyasiitra (250) 
97.ParamarthasamvrtisatyanirdeSasiitra (250) 
98.Pravaranasttra (2500 
99.Ratnacandrapariprechasitra (250) 
100.Ratnactidapariprechasitra (250) 
101.Ratnajalipariprechasiitra (250) 
102.Ratnakarandasitra (250) 
103.Saddharmapundarikasiitra (250) (Kern) 
104.Sagaranagarapariprechasiitra (250) 
105.Samantamukhaparivartasitra (250) 
106.Sarvapunyasamuccayasamadhisitra (250) 
107.Sarvavaipulyavidyasiddhastitra (250) 
108.Simhapariprechastitra (250) 
109.Srimaladevisimhanadasutra (250) (A. and H. Wayman) 
110.Srimatibadhamanipariprechasttra (250) 
111.Strivivartyavyakaranasiitra (250) 
112.Sumatidarikapariprechasiitra (250) 
113.Susthitamatidevaputrapariprechasutra (250) 
114.Svapnanirdesasiitra (250) 
115.TathagatacintyaguhyanirdeSastitra (250) 
116.Tathagatagarbhasiitra (250) 
117.Udayanavatsarajapariprechasiitra (250) 
118.UpayakauSalyasiitra (250) 
119.Vaiduryardjasiitra (250) 
120.Vidyutpraptapariprechasitra (250) 
121.Viradatta(grhapati)pariprechasutra (250) 
122.Vimaladattapariprecha (250) 
123.ViSesacinta(brahma)pariprechasiitra (250) 
124.Vimuttimagga (250) (Potter) 

125 Atandtikasiitra (250) 

126.Tattvasiddhi (Harivarman) (253) (Potter) 





CONTENTS 


127.Subahupariprechasutra (260) 
128.Sukastitra (260) 


129.Sumantabhadrabodhisattvadhayaficayadharmasutra (260) 


130.Bhaisajyaguruvaidiiryaprabhasyaptirvapranidhanavisesa- 
vistarasiitra (280) 

131.Mahayanabhidharmasitra (300) (Dutt) 

132.Buddhabhimisiitra (300) (Keenan) 


133.Samyuktabhidharmasutra (Dharmatrata) (300) (Dessein) 


134.Paricavastukavibhasa (Dharmatrata) (300) (Lindmer) 
135.Arthaviniscayasitra (300) (Samtani) 
136.Samdhinirmocanasiitra (325) 
137.Madhyamakakarika-Akutobhaya (Pingala) (325) 
138.Lankavatarasiitra (325) 

139.Nirayastitra (340) 

140.Ekottaragamasiitra (345) 
141.Bodhisattvapiirvacaryasitra (350) 
142.Buddhapitakaduhsilanirgrahasittra (350) 
143.Candragarbhasiitra (350) 
144.Dharani(Svara)rdjasiitra (350) 
145.Gayasirsastitra (350) 
146.KuSalamiilasamparigrhasiitra (350) 
147.Mahamayiiri(vidyarajfit)sitra (350) 
148.Maitreyavyakaranasiitra (350) 
149.Piirnapariprcchasittra or Bodhisattvapitakasitra (350) 
150.Sariputrapariprechasiitra (350) 
151.Saddharmapravrttinirdesastitra (350) 
152.Sumukha(dharani)siitra (350) 
153.Updlipariprechasiitra (350) 
154.Vikurvanarajapariprechasiitra (350) 
155.Dasabhiimikavibhasasittra (Nagarjuna) (350) 
156.Prajriaparamitahrdayasiitra (350) (Conze) 
157.Vajracchedikaprajfiaparamitasiitra (350) (Conze) 
158.Srilata (350) 

159.Caturagamavibhaga (Vasubhadra) (350) 
160.Sammitiyanikayasastra (350) (Buswell) 
161.Dharmataradhyayanasitra (360) 
162.Ratnardsisiitra (360) 
163.Dvddasa(dvara)mukhasastra (Nagarjuna) (360) (Potter) 
164.Madhyantavibhagasutra (360) (Anacker) 


xi 


312 
312 
312 


312 
313 
313 
314 
319 


323 
329 
332 
346 
346 
346 
346 
346 
346 
346 
346 
346 
346 
346 


346 
346 
347 
347 
347 
347 
348 
349 
349 
353 
365 
365 
365 
374 


xii CONTENTS 


165.Mahay4anasiitralamkara (Vyavadatasamaya) (Anacker) 382 
166.Yogacarabhiimi (Asanga) (Potter/Schmithausen/Davidson)398 
167.Vikhyapanasastra and Bhdsya thereon (Asanga) (300) 433 


168.Abhidharmasamuccaya (Asanga) (360) (Griffiths) 434 
169. Trigatikayahprajfiaparamitakarikdsaptati (Asanga) (360) 452 
170.Mahaydsamgraha (Asanga) (360) (Anacker) 459 
171.Dharmadharmatavibhaga (360) (Anacker) 476 
172.Abhisamayalamkara (360) (Anacker) 478 


173.Abhidharmakosa (Vasubandhu) (360) (Anacker/Potter) 486 
174.Abhidharmakosabhasya (Vasubandhu) (360) (Anacker) 516 
175.Pratityasamutpada-vyakhya or -vibhanganirdesa 


(Vasubandhu) (360) (Anacker) 565 
176.Aparamitayuhsitropadesa (Vasubandhu) (360) 565 
177.Buddhanusmrtitika (Vasubandhu) (360) 566 
178.Bhadracaryapranidhanatika (Vasubandhu) (360) 566 
179.Commentary on the Caturdharmakasiitra (Vasubandhu) 566 
180.Sanmukhi-Vyakhyana (Vasubandhu) (360) 566 
181.Dasabhiimikasittravyakhya (Vasubandhu) (360) 567 
182.Dharmacakrapravartanasiitra (Vasubandhu) (360) 567 
183.Gathadsamgrahasastrartha (Vasubandhu) (360) 567 
184.Gaydsirsasittratika (Vasubandhu) (360) 567 


185.Mahayanasatadharmakaprakagamukhasastra (Vasubandhu)567 
186.Nirvanasiitrapiirvabhiitotpannabhitasastra (Vasubandhu) 567 
187.Commentary on a Prajfiapdramitdasiitra (Vasubandhu) 567 
188.Commentary on Ratnaciidamanistitra (Vasubandhu) (360) 567 
189.Commentary on the Srimaldsimhanddasitra 


(Vasubandhu) (360) 567 
190.Saddharmapundarikopadesa (Vasubandhu) (360) 567 
191.Sukhavativyuhopadesa (Vasubandhu) (360) (Kiyota) 568 
192.Commentary on Asaiga's Vajracchedikabhdasya 

(Vasubandhu) (360) 570 
193.Visesacintibrahmapariprechasastra (Vasubandhu) ( 360) 570 
194.Vyakhyayukti (Vasubandhu) ( 360) 570 
195.Vadavidhi (Vasubandhu) (360) (Anacker) 570 


196.Paficaskandhakaprakarana (Vasubandhu) (360) (Anacker) 574 
197.Karmasiddhiprakarana (Vasubandhu) (360) (Anacker) 578 
198.Dharmadharmatavibhagavrtti (Vasubandhu) ( 360) 

(Anacker) 588 
199.Mahayanastitralamkarabhasya (Vasubandhu) (Anacker) 596 





CONTENTS 


200.Madhyantavibhagabhasya (Vasubandhu) (360) (Anacker) 
201.Mahayanasamgrahabhasya (Vasubandhu) (Anacker) 
202.Trimsikakarika (Vasubandhu) (360) (Anacker) 
203.VimSatika and Vrtti thereon (Vasubandhu) (Anacker) 
204. Trisvabhavanirdega (Vasubandhu) (360) (Anacker) 
205.Bodhicittotpadasitra(Ssastra) (Vasubandhu) (B. S. Bhiksu) 
206.Nyayanusara (Samghabhadra) (380) (Cox) 
207.Abhidharmasamayapradipika (Samghabhadra) (Cox) 


ENDNOTES 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


xiii 


610 
627 
638 
640 
644 
647 
650 
716 


717 


759 


PREFACE 


The following Volume constitutes the second in a series devoted to 
Buddhist philosophy. It takes up more or less where its predecessor, 
Volume Seven of this Encyclopedia, leaves off, around the beginning 
of the second century A.D. This is a period still not well understood, 
with a good deal of scholarly disagreement remaining about many 
aspects of the history and thought of the period. As merely one 
example, it remains a debated point whether there were one or two 
Vasubandhus, with respected scholars taking both sides of the issue. 
The Editor of the present Volume makes no claim to expertise on 
such issues. Where reputable scholars disagree it is difficult to know 
which way to turn when attempting to summarize the history and 
beliefs of the period. We have tried to utilize the most up-to-date 
scholarship known to us at the time of writing, with full realization 
that tomorrow new evidence or better arguments may settle such 
issues definitively in the minds of scholars. When this happens, the 
treatment here will evidently become out of date. Since given the 
plan of the entire Encyclopedia we are more or less committed to 
presenting as consistent an account as possible of the history of 
Indian philosophical thought, citing experts known to us on points 
that seem debatable. 

It will be evident to the reader of what follows that there 
remains a good deal to be done in bringing to light the thought of 
the Buddhists of the present period. A large number of texts are 
essentially unexplored by scholars in the Western world, at least. 
The Editor of the present Volume, being unable to read the 
languages of much excellent scholarship--Chinese, Japanese and 
Russian, e.g.-- and whose facility in European languages is halting, 
has been forced to rely on publications in English for the most part, 
although he has tried to become acquainted with some of the 
material available in French and German. Furthermore, he is not 
conversant with Tibetan, the language in which quite a bit of 
Buddhist literature is primarily and in some cases solely available. 
Fortunately others have conveyed to the English-reading public 
some of the most important findings of those writing in other 
languages. Nevertheless, these failings underline the point that our 
attempt here to deal with the scholarship on Indian philosophy has 


xvi PREFACE 


serious limitations, and that improvements on it by those whose 
linguistic abilities are greater, or who number more than the single 
person who has tried to put the present account together, are clearly 
called for. 

Thanks are due to various sources of funding that helped 
make the present volume possible: in particular, grants from the 
Smithsonian Institution, the American Institute of Indian Studies, 
and the National Endowment for the Humanities contributed to the 
overall effort. We owe our gratitude to those scholars, living and 
dead, whose understanding of the contents of the works 
summarized here is utilized. In particular, I wish to thank Stefan 
Anacker and Christian Lindtmer for their generous assistance and for 
helpful comments on sections of the manuscript, though they are in 
no way responsible for the mistakes that have inevitably crept into 
the results. 


May 1997 KARL H. POTTER 


PART ONE 


INTRODUCTION 





1. AUTHOR UNKNOWN (lst c. B.C.), Satparamita. 
According to Akira Hirakawa, "it probably consisted of a 
description of the six perfections" and was "probably compiled in the 
first century B.C.E., ie. before the Christian era. Its title in Chinese 
is Liu po-lo-mi ching. It is quoted in 17.Kasyapaparivarta.”* 


2. AUTHOR UNKNOWN (Ist c. A.D.?), Bodhisattvapitaka 
Chinese P'u-sa tsang-ching, also quoted in 17.Kasyapaparivarta. 
Its contents are not known, though several later works appear to 
have been based on it.” 


3. AUTHOR UNKNOWN (lst c.A.D.), Triskandhadharmaparyaya. 

Chinese San-p'in ching. The work is related to 
27.Ugradattapariprecha,” and dealt with such topics as stipa- 
worship, confession to the Buddha of one's wrongdoings, 
transference of merit, etc.”* 


4. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Katyayandvadanasiitra (1st c. A.D.?). 

This sittra is mentioned by Nagarjuna in 33.Madhyamakakarika 
13.7. Jacques May says that "the antinomy between substantialism 
and nihilism...was formally expressed in the Katyayana-avadana- 
sutra".”° 


5. AUTHOR UNKNOWN (100 A.D.), 

Astasahasrika(prajfiapa@ramitasiitra).”’ 
"This work, which exists in several closely-related versions...seems 
to have attained its earliest version some time between 100 B.C.E. 
and 50 A.D.."* A.K.Warder (who also provides a brief summary) 
attempts to pick out themes that represent a departure from 
Abhidharma texts of a similar date. He speculates that the 
Sinhalese commentaries and this text "seem to be contemporary in 
origin and probably developed in deliberate opposition to one 
another", for "the writer of the (Asta-) wished to attack the 

conceptions of the abhidharma commentators".” 

Indeed, the Asta regularly asserts that all factors are without 
essential nature (asvabhava), and draws the conclusion we find in 
Nagarjuna's works, such that no one is bound, no one freed, that all 


80 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


such contrasts fail to apply since all factors are empty. To 
understand this is to gain "perfection of understanding" (Conze's 
translation of prajfiaparamita). The Bodhisattva who gains that 
perfection is called tathagata, "thus-gone", for his "thusness" is gone 
just as each factor, properly understood, has been "gone" all along. 


Summary by Robert F. Olson® 


"The stated purpose of the Perfection of Insight as a teaching is 
essentially the same as that of Nagarjuna--getting rid of attachment: 
"This dharma is taught for the sake of not-taking-hold (anudgraha) 
of any dharma--yet the world carries on taking-hold...This perfection 
of insight is presented for a great purpose: for [bringing about] non- 
acquisition (aparigraha), for [bringing about] non-addiction 
(anabhinivesa)." 

"Such a program aims at the elimination of a mode of experience, 
that is, experience qualified by attachment. The goal is a detached 
mode of knowing--perfect insight or enlightenment--which is 
described in negative terms: 'The Tathagatas' non-attachment- 
knowing (asarigajriana) is indeed perfect insight...Non-apprehension 
(anupalambha) of any dharma is the perfection of insight. Thus it 
is said that when there is no idea (samjfiad), name (naman), 
designation (prajfiapti), or conventional language (vyavahara)--then 
(there is] perfect insight...This is that perfection of insight--no 
supposition (manyamdnata) about any dharma at all." 

"From this we gather that the unattached mode of knowing real 
things (dharmas) is a mode of knowing without conceptualization. 
Insofar, then, as any real thing is conceived or talked about, it is 
known in the attached mode and is thereby falsified. Dharmas or 
dharmata (real-thing-hood, the nature of reality) as conceived, 
schematized (for example, in abhidharma thought), and talked 
about are fabrications (kalpana)." 

"For those dharmas are not there in the way that untaught, 
simple people are addicted to them...The way they are not there is 
the way they are there. Thus they are not-being-here (avidyamdna), 
so they are called ignorance (avidya). Untaught, simple people are 
addicted to them. All dharmas, not being there, are fabricated 
(kalpita) by them. Having fabricated them they are attached to the 
two extremes (existence and non-existence, etc.) and neither know 


ASTASAHASRIKA 81 


nor see those dharmas (as they really are)...Having fabricated them 
they become addicted to the two extremes. Having become 
addicted, and relying on that source as [a basis of] apprehension, 
they fabricate past dharmas, future dharmas, present dharmas. 
Having fabricated these they become addicted to name and form 
(the five bundles?)...Fabricating all those dharmas which are not 
there they neither know nor see the Path as it really is... They do not 
go forth from the triple world. They do not wake up to the true end 
(bhitakoti, i.e. ultimate reality)." 

“Attachment is by means of both name (naman) and sign 
(nimitta)...[Thinking] ‘form and the other aggregates are empty’-- 
this is attachment. (If) one entertains the ideas 'past dharmas' with 
regard to past dharmas, ‘future dharmas'’ with regard to future 
dharmas, ‘present dharmas' with regard to present dharmas--this is 
attachment." 

"The term ‘dharmas' here is necessarily ambiguous. Its basic 
function is to designate something real or valid. Thus dharmata 
refers to the nature of all that is real, what constitutes actuality. But 
‘dharma’ is itself a word, and when dharmas are named--form, 
consciousness, bodhisattva, nirvana, or whatever--they are totally 
within the sphere of the attached mode. It is in this sense that ‘all 
dharmas are made up by fabrication.’ At the same time the terms 
‘dharma’ and ‘dharmata' are used to refer to what is ultimately real, 
apart from fabrication: ‘All dharmas are talked about only by means 
of names, only by means of [linguistic] transaction (vyavahdra). But 
the transaction is nowhere, is out of nowhere, is not a transaction 
at all: all dharmas are free of transaction, free of talk, not 
transacted, not talked about." 

"The skill-in-means (updyakausalya) of the bodhisattva is both to 
perceive signs--the images, ideas, and names mentally abstractable 
from experience--and to develop his awareness of the signlessness 
of reality as it is ultimately. This is an expression of the doctrine of 
the two truths, conventional and ultimate, applied in a way which 
reveals the bodhisattva to be a being ‘in this world but not of it.' It 





1. Olson translates "skandha" as "bundle". In the present volume we 
are translating the term as "aggregate". To avoid confusion we 
replace Olson's translation by ours for the remainder of this section. 


82 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


is this skill-in-means which enables him to operate in the two modes 
simultaneously. However, because he does remain in the unattached 
mode, he is not karmically bound to those experiences which are 
normally in the sphere of atachment: 'He cultivates, devotes himself 
to, and honors forms, sounds, odors, tastes, touches--but he does so 
because, in fact, he has ‘overcome’, (abhibhiya) these, he has no 
attachment or objective supports (alambana) and his acts thus arise 
out of skill-in-means." 

“Conventional or transactional truth includes the entire realm of 
discourse, not only what is invalid in relation to Buddhist discourse 
but Buddhist discourse as well: ‘In reality no distinction or 
difference between [any of] these dharmas can be apprehended (na 
upalabhyate). As talk they are described by the Tathagata..."empty," 
or "signless,", or "wishless," or “without formation," or "non-arising," 
or "without birth," or "non-existence," or "dispassion," or "cessation," 
or “nirvana"--these are [just] talked about...All dharmas whatever 
are beyond talk (anabhilapya)." 

“Perfection of insight'--this is only name-giving. And [the 
possibility of validly asserting:] 'that name is this [actual thing]' 
cannot be apprehended. We say that the name has only speech as 
its object-of-reference, while that perfection of insight is neither 
found nor apprehended: just as it is a name, just so is it perfection 
of insight; just as perfection of insight is, just so is the name. A 
duality of dharmas here is neither found nor apprehended." 

"The actual references of the word 'perfection-of-insight' is not to 
a real thing but to a speech-thing, verbalized reality--or as the 
commentary says, the term just reflects the discrimination 
(vikalpapratibimbaka) of the attached mode. The real thing which 
is being talked about, that is, the state of perfect insight, is not 
capable of comparison with the name or concept, since names can 
only be compared with names--and it is only when there are no 
names that the reality of perfect insight is found. Even the negative 
language associated with ultimate truth has finally to be seen in this 
light: 'Non-arising (anutpdda) appears to you to be talked about, but 
this same non-arising is [only] talk...Form is unthinkable and so are 
the other aggregates. [When a bodhisattva does not even entertain 
the idea "form is unthinkable," he proceeds in the perfection of 
insight." 

"The nonattached mode of knowing is present when one 


a 


ASTASAHASRIKA 83 


‘proceeds but does not arrive at [the considerations] "I proceed" and 
"I will proceed" because all dharmas are neither arrived at nor 
depended upon [in reality]. This is the bodhisattvas' samadhi called 
‘non-dependency upon any dharma (sarvadharma-anupadana)'. This 
mode is spoken of as ‘standing in emptiness', which is where the 
Tathagata stood and where all those who follow him should stand-- 
precisely nowhere at all--because his mind was not fixated 
(apratisthamdnasa) by any conceptualized dharma or consideration." 

"The inevitable conclusion is that what is so for the unattached 
mode has nothing to do with understanding, hence the paradoxic 
rejoinder by Subhiiti to those who find the teaching on the 
perfection of insight difficult to understand: 'It can't be understood, 
it can't be understood (na vijfiayate)...for in it nothing at all is 
pointed out, nothing at all is learned.’ And as there is no dharma at 
all pointed out, illuminated, or communicated no one will ever gain 
the perfection of insight from Subhiti’s teaching of it." 

"Looked at from this paradoxic angle, that is, from the point of 
view of ultimate truth, all doxa--the points of view of transactional 
truth--are equally mere fabrications, none of which can be said to be 
even relatively adequate to express or describe perfect insight, since 
the latter is not "available" for comparison with its linguistic 
descriptions. We are apparently no closer to a possible link between 
conceptuality and enlightenment, intelligibility and nirvana. But 
from the very discontinuity between the two, there emerges an 
interesting corollary: while on the one hand the real and the fictive, 
or fabricative, cannot be distinguished because distinguishing is 
itself conceptual, on the other hand what fabrication, 
discriminations, concepts really are is, in fact, the perfection of 
insight." 

‘This perfection of insight cannot be taught or learned or 
distinguished or considered or demonstrated or reflected upon by 
means of the aggregates or by means of the elements (dhatu) or by 
means of the sense-fields (dyatana). The reason for this is the 
isolation (viviktatva) of all dharmas, the absolute isolation of all 
dharmas...But the perfection of insight is not to be understood apart 
from the aggregates, etc. The reason for this is that it is just the very 
aggregates, etc., which are empty, isolated, quieted. For thus are 
the perfection of insight and the aggregates, etc.: a non-duality 
which is without division and cannot be apprehended because of its 


84 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


emptiness...its isolation...and hence its being quieted." 

"This nondual nature is referred to in quasi-positive terms as 
'suchness’ (tathata): "The Tathagata knows form (and each of the 
aggregates) as suchness...The suchness of the aggregates is the 
suchness of the world; the suchness of the world is the suchness of 
all dharmas...This is all just one suchness which has left behind the 
manifold [states] of existence and non-existence, because it is not 
one, not many, not disappearing, without modification, without 
duality, undivided...This one suchness of all real things is also 
identical with perfect insight, the state of enlightenment...Because 
of the boundlessness of objective supports (alambana; intended 
object), this perfection of insight is a boundless perfection. Because 
of the boundiessness of sentient beings this perfection of insight is 
a boundless perfection. Because all dharmas are without a 
beginning, middle, or end this perfection of insight is a boundless 
perfection." 

"This absence of own-being (svabhava) in beings should be 
known as the nature of the perfection of insight. The absence of 
own-being (that is, independent self-existence) in beings 
demonstrates the absence of it in the perfection of insight. Similarly, 
their isolation, unthinkability, indestructible nature, and the fact 
that they are not in the process of becoming enlightened--all 
demonstrate the same for the perfection of insight." 

"If then the nature of reality is not different from enlightenment, 
then the nature of reality must share the unattached, nondepending, 
nonapprehending character of enlightenment. A hint of this can be 
seen in two of the terms often associated (as above) with siinya 
(empty), namely, vivikta (isolated), and Santa (quieted). Both of 
these seem to have their origin in the language of meditation 
proper: the isolation or separation of the meditator from his 
conceptual and emotional ‘connectedness’ with his normal social 
world, followed by his development of inner quiet or tranquillity 
(Samatha, upagama, etc.). With the Perfection of Insight tradition 
these subjective aspects of disconnectedness and tranquillity are said 
to be the ultimate nature of all real things." 

"The ultimate nature of reality shares in the disconnectedness 
which characterizes the perfection of insight. Since this insight is 
unattached knowing, the Tathagatas 'demonstrate Dharma to beings 
for the sake of non-clinging (aslesa)...The non-connection 


ASTASAHASRIKA 8s 


(asambandha) of form (and the other aggregates) is the non- 
clinging of form...The non-connection of form is form's lack of 
crigination and cessation...In this way non-clinging comes to be, as 
a result of knowing and seeing that all dharmas are not clinging, not 
connected." 

"This common nature leads to further implications. Perfect insight 
is not different from the real nature of those characteristics of the 
attached mode which, conventionally, the perfection of insight is 
supposed to eliminate. ‘This is the perfection of non-discipline 
(avinaya), because there is no apprehension of past, future, and 
present goals...This is the perfection of nonaffliction (asamklesa), 
because there is no own-being to greed, anger, and delusion...This 
is the perfection of dispassion, because there is no falseness in any 
dharma...This is the perfection of non-arising, because there is no 
discrimination in any dharma...This is the perfection of non- 
discrimination, because of its identity with discrimination 
(vikalpasamata)...This is the perfection of suffering, because the 
nature of dharmas is like space...Distracted thoughts are thoughts 
distracted from the nature of dharmas (dharmata). But such 
thoughts when seen as they really are by insight are without 
[intrinsic] characteristics and are in reality not distracted. Indeed, 
those thoughts are by nature brightly clear (prakrtiprabhasvara)." 

“After all, if it is all dharmas which share the same nature, 
suchness, with the perfection of insight, then such unwholesome 
(akusala) dharmas as anger, delusion, discrimination, distraction, 
suffering, etc. are not to be excluded." 

"Finally, there is the clear implication that it is the given nature 
of things which is identical with the perfection of insight, and 
therefore this insight is not something which has yet to be attained 
by the striving bodhisattva. Enlightenment, in short, is what the 
bodhisattva already really is. ‘The [meditative] actualization 
(bhavand) of the perfection of insight is an actualization of space. 
Homage should be paid to those bodhisattvas who put this armor 
on, for he who fastens on his armor for the sake of beings seeks to 
be armed with space...For the sake of beings who are [themselves] 
like space, like the dharma-realm, he seeks to be armed, he seeks to 
become fully enlightened. He seeks to liberate space, he seeks to get 
Tid of space...He will make efforts about space, about wide-open 
Space, who thinks of being trained in or of making efforts about the 


86 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


perfection of insight...Deep is the perfection of insight: it is not 
actualized by anything, for no one actualizes it...nor is there 
anything to be actualized...anvwhere. The actualization of the 
perfection of insight is actualization of space, of all dharmas, of non- 
attachment, of the limitless, of non-existence, of non-acquiring." 
"The nature of things is not something which requires 
actualization: space is empty without needing to develop that 
emptiness. In exactly the same way the perfection of 
insight is not in need of development. The implication is evident 
that the essential original nature of thought (citta), brightly clear, 
as well as the nature of things in general, is unattached knowing, 
the perfection of insight which constitutes buddhahood: 'The nature 
of all dharmas is complete purity...All dharmas have attained 
nirvana, [and hence] are identical with suchness...All dharmas are 
noble arhats, completely purified by nature...All dharmas are 
enlightenment because they cause one to be aware of the buddha- 
knowing (buddhajfana)." 


6. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Ren ben yu sheng jing.® 

This and the following nine works were translated by An Shih- 
kao into Chinese between 150 and 170 A.D. The brief summaries 
given of works numbered 6-15 are provided by E. Ziircher. None of 
them have, so far as we know, been translated into Western 
languages; it is not even clear what an appropriate retranslation 
from the Chinese of the original Sanskrit titles might be. Ziircher 
elsewhere? characterizes An Shih-kao's translations thus: "As 
translations, they are generally of the poorest quality. It is somewhat 
surprising that later Chinese Buddhist bibliographers...have praised 
the products of An Shih-kao and his school as masterpieces and 
classical examples of the art of translating. It is hard to see on what 
criteria their appreciation was based...Most archaic versions are 
actually no more than free paraphrases or extracts of the original 
texts, teeming with obscure and not yet standardized technical 
expressions, and coated in a language which is chaotic to the 
extreme and not seldom quite unintelligible..." 

Ziircher provides the following description of the gist of these 
and the other nine works: "To judge from the nature of the 
scriptures translated, the two main subjects of his teachings seem to 
have been (a) the system of mental exercises commonly called 


REN BEN YU SHENG JING 87 


dhyana (ch'an) in Chinese sources, but which is more adequately 
covered by the term ‘Buddhist yoga’, comprising such practices as 
the preparatory technique of counting the respirations leading to 
mental concentration (Gnapanasmrti), the contemplation of the body 
as being perishable, composed of elements, impure and full of 
suffering; the visualization of internal and external images of 
various colours, etc.; (b) the explanation of numerical categories 
such as the six dyatana, the five skandha, the four rddhipdda, the 
five bala, the four smrtyupasthdna, etc.; short siitras devoted to such 
classifications form the bulk of the oeuvre attributed to him."® 


7. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Yigie liu she shou yin jing.™ 
"Very short text explaining the way to extirpate the Impurities 
(dsrava)." 


8. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Si di jing.®5 
"Exposition of the Four Noble Truths." 


9. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Ben xiang yi zhi jing. 
"Causal series leading from 'bad company’, viz. ‘unbelief’, 'wrong 
thoughts'...to ‘desire’, and the opposite series, leading from ‘good 
company’ to ‘emancipation'." 


10. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Lou fenbu jing.” 
"Scholastic enumeration of the Impurities, Sense-desires, Feelings, 


Perceptions, etc., together with their causal factors and their bad 
consequences." 


11. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Pu fayi jing. 
"Various series of 12, 20, 16...etc. factors, every series being 
either conducive or obstructive to Emancipation." 


12. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Ba zheng dao jing.” 
"The eight bad ways of action and the eight good ways of action 
that constitute the Eightfold Path." 


13. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Da anban shouyi jing.” 
3 "Treatise describing the practice of "Respiratory Concentration" 
(Qnapana-smrti), together with a commentary that has become 


88 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
inextricably mixed up with the text." 


14. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Yin chi ru jing.” 
"Scholastic compendium dealing with sense-perception, the four 
bases of super-natural power, the five powers, etc." 


15. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Chanxing faxiang jing.” 
"Very short text containing a list of themes for contemplation." 


16. AUTHOR UNKNOWN (125), 
Ajatasatrukaukrtyavinodanasiitra.* 


17. AUTHOR UNKNOWN (125), Kagyapaparivartasiitra.™ 

In this siitra the Buddha reviews for Mahakasyapa the conditions 
that cause backsliding, that lead to wisdom and the growth of 
virtue, and that indicate the marks of a Bodhisattva. He describes 
the middle way between extremes, dependent origination, the 
emptiness of things, but warns one not to become attached to 
emptiness. The truth is indicated by a number of pithy illustrations. 
Notable are examples to show that there is no such thing as a 
"mind", and that supposing that there is breeds karma. A section, 
also found in several other texts, alludes to the defection of the "five 
hundred", presumably the Mahasamghikas, and how they were 
wooed back into the fold by magical monks sent by the Buddha, 
monks who taught the defecters the correct understanding of 
emptiness. 


18. AUTHOR UNKNOWN (125), 
Aksobhya(tathagatasya)vyithasiitra.* * 

This work tells of a pupil of the Buddha who resolved to seek to 
avoid the way of a sravaka or pratyekabuddha and become the 
Bodhisattva Aksobhya (meaning "Immovable"). Gautama confirms 
that Aksobhya will indeed become a tathagata and there is great 
rejoicing. The Buddha goes on to describe the pleasures of the 
heaven attained by Aksobhya and the power of his vows. 





89 


19. AUTHOR UNKNOWN (125), 
Drumakinnarardjapariprechasiitra.*° 


Summary by Paul Harrison 


"(T)he DKP is a scripture which deals with the perfections or 
transcendent qualities (paramita) within a narrative framework in 
which a leading role is taken, not by a bhiksu or bodhisattva, as is 
customary, but by a non-human being, a kinnara king whose name 
is Druma (which means "tree"). Kinnaras...are a class of mythical 
beings who are sometimes depicted as having the heads of horses 
and the bodies of human beings (or vice versa). They possess a 
special aptitude, which they share with gandharvas, for making 
music; and their celestial music-making is of great power and 
beauty. In fact, music and sound in general play an important part 
in this text...Music symbolises the syren call of the senses which only 
highly advanced bodhisattvas and Buddhas have transcended 
entirely, and at the same time, it stands as a metaphor for the 
elusive and ephemeral nature of all phenomena, which are in the 
final analysis as ungraspable as echoes; in short, it stands for 
"emptiness"...King Druma shows special understanding of the 
emptiness of sensory experience, and his eventual awakening to 
Buddhahood is predicted later in the work (Chap. 7). The doctrine 
of emptiness is alluded to or treated extensively at various points, 
and the perfections are also expounded systematically in Chap. 7, 
which, significantly, describes the six standard perfections in order, 
followed by upayakausalya, skill in the use of creative stratagems, 
which is presented more or less as a seventh perfection, although it 
is not designated as such. Upayakausalya is in fact one of the key 
doctrinal elements of the text. Other special features of the DKP are 
the dramatic richness of its narrative passages and its extensive 
section dealing with the way in which, and the reasons for which, 
women are to be reborn as men before they can achieve awakening 
(Chap. 9). One particularly interesting element is the protective 
mantra which appears in Chap. 15, possibly the first such formula 
to be transcribed and translated into Chinese. Another is the clear 
reference to the content of the 16. Ajatasatru-kaukytya-vinodana- 
sutra which appears in Chapter 12...It is in my experience very rare 


90 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


for one Mahayana siltra to refer to another in this way--striking 
evidence, quite apart from their thematic links and the fact that they 
were both translated by Lokaksema, that these two texts were 
produced or circulated in the same milieu."” 


20. AUTHOR UNKNOWN (125), Lokdnuvartanasiitra.%® 
Summary by Paul Harrison 


"The text falls, very roughly, into two halves. The first half deals 
with the Buddha's person, working item by item through the major 
events of his life (e.g. the birth of Rahula) as well as its recurrent 
day-to-day activities (e.g., cleaning the teeth) to show that all these 
are part of a deliberately fostered illusion of humanity - that the 
true nature of the Buddha's being and his real attributes are quite 
different from those which he projects among men in order to 
further their salvations. Despite all appearances to the contrary, the 
Buddha remains above this world--he is 'supramundane' or 
‘transcendent’ (lokottara). The second half of the siitra addresses 
itself by and large to the Buddha's teaching, and once again, the 
truth about phenomena is contrasted with what the Buddha actually 
proclaimed during his ministry. The Buddha's teaching, like his 
person, is far more than it appears to be. It is in this ‘ontological’ 
section of the LAn that one finds expressed a doctrinal standpoint 
very similar to that of the early Prajiiaparamita as set forth in the 
Astasahasrikd, a standpoint which insists upon the 'emptiness' of all 
dharmas, their non-arising (the term anutpattidharmaksanti occurs) 
and lack of own-being (svabhava), the merely conventional validity 


of verbal distinctions as opposed to the true undifferentiated 
of the dharmadhétu, and so on." patra eet 


21. AUTHOR UNKNOWN (125), 
Pratyutpannabuddhasammukhavasthitasiitra” 

; In Appendix A of his translation Paul Harrison reviews the textual 
history of various versions of this text. His conclusions are as 
follows: Lokaksema and an Indian collaborator translated this work 
in 179 A.D. "In 208 the translation was completely revised, possibly 
by members of Lokaksema's school..." It continued to be retranslated 
or abridged until by the beginning of the ninth century it had been 





PRATYUTPANNABUDDHASAMMUKHAVASTHITA 91 


translated into Tibetan "in a form...which differs considerably from 
that which the Chinese versions reveal." In the next few paragraphs 
we provide selections from Harrison's section on "The structure of 
the PraS", pp. xxvii-xxxiii of his book in which the translation 
appears. 


Summary by Paul Harrison 


"The PraS opens with a long niddna (1A-I) describing the 
assembling of the Buddha's audience in the Venuvana outside 
Rajagrha; pride of place is given to eight bodhisattvas...each from 
one of the eight major cities of the Buddha's world. Bhadra- 
pala...asks the Buddha which samadhi bodhisattvas should practice 
in order to acquire them (1J-Y)..the Buddha states that the samadhi 
required is the pratyutpanna-samadhi..(2B-J)...the vividness and yet 
the ultimate unreality of that which is perceived during the samadhi 
are emphasized (3A-O). In Chap. 4 the Buddha outlines some of the 
practical and ethical prerequisites for the practice of the samadhi, 
while in Chap. 5 he stresses the need for reverence for the preacher 
of Dharma (5A), and describes the great efficacy of the 
pratyutpanna-samadhi...(5B-E). Chap. 6 deals with the considerable 
loss to be suffered by those future followers of the Buddha who will 
refuse to accept and practice the samadhi...Great is the merit to be 
derived from believing in this teaching, the Buddha solemnly avows 
to his audience (6A-J). 

"The Buddha continues to praise in the most fulsome terms the 
excellence of those who take up the samadhi (7A-G), before 
returning in Chap. 8 to the practice of the samadhi itself. Some 
quite 'philosophical’...passages deal with various points of doctrine-- 
relating mainly to the perception of phenomena--which bodhisattvas 
should attempt to internalise in their practice of the samadhi (8A- 
K). Following this the Buddha outlines the qualities--moral 
attitudinal, practical, social--required of bodhisattvas who have 
given up the household life...(9A-M). Subsequently the Buddha 
deals in turn with those things required of Mahayana bhiksunis 
(10A-C), householder bodhisattvas...(11A-D), and Mahayana 
upasikas (12A-c). 

"Bhadrap§la...asks if (the Buddha's teaching) will continue to 
Circulate in Jambudvipa after the Buddha's demise (13A). The 


92 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Buddha replies that the samadhi will disappear sometime after his 
Parinirvana, but that it will re-appear iri the ‘last five hundred years' 
to be taken up and propagated by a few faithful souls (13B). Moved 
to tears of joy by this revelation, Bhadrapala and his seven 
bodhisattva companions undertake to preach the samadhi in the 
terrible ‘last five hundred years' (13C-F). They are joined by five 
hundred other followers, and beseech the Buddha to entrust the 
samadhi to the eight bodhisattvas (13G-H). The Buddha responds 
with one of his famous similes (131), and Ananda, on cue as ever, 
asks in verse what the reason is for this (13J). By way of reply the 
Buddha recapitulates in verse...(13K). The eight bodhisattvas rejoice 
over these revelations...(14A). 

"Bhadrapala then enquires after further prerequisites for correct 
practice, and the Buddha enumerates four (14B), after which he 
goes on to detail the many worldly advantages to be derived from 
the samadhi, including the capacity to acquire, even in one's 
dreams, hitherto unknown teachings (14C-J)....Further 
‘philosophical’ passages follow, in which the correct practice of the 
four smrtyupasthana is related to that of the samadhi, and various 
statements are made concerning the nature of phenomena and the 
proper attitude to them (15J-N). 

"Bhadrapala next asks the Buddha what things will enable the 
bodhisattva to acquire the samadhi successfully (16K). The Buddha 
details another series of attributes, attitudes, practices, etc. (16L-V), 
and then recalls the prediction of his own awakening during the 
time of Dipamkara...(17A-B)... 

"Bhadrapala again asks how bodhisattvas should cultivate the 
samadhi, and the Buddha in reply discusses the required 
understanding of ‘all dharmas' and the proper attitude to them, with 
reference to the correct practice of the smrtyupasthdnas (18A-F)... 

"Chap. 19 contains further instructions on correct practice (19A- 
B), and lists eight dharmas which bodhisattvas engaged in the 
samadhi will acquire (19C)...In addition to these eight dharmas, 
bodhisattvas will acquire the ten powers of a Tathagata (20A-K), the 
four assurances (21A-E) and the eighteen dharmas exclusive to a 
Buddha (22A-B). 

"At the beginning of Chap. 23 the Buddha propounds four acts of 
‘rejoicing’ which bodhisattvas should formally rehearse with regard 
to the samadhi (23A-D). The merit from this, which is to be 


PRATYUTPAN NABUDDHASAMMUKHAVASTHITA 93 


‘dedicated’ to others for the sake of perfect awakening, is described 
as very great indeed (23E-F)...The Buddha then tells how the 
samadhi should be preserved for future believers by being copied 
cored away...(24A-B)... 

ean, the paaane addresses himself to Bhadrapala and his 
seven companions, their five hundred followers, and the rest of his 
audience (26B)..-He tells Bhadrapala that the samadhi is to be 
mastered and taught to others so that it will endure (26D)..." 


22. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Dousha jing.'° 


101 


23. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Wenshushili wen pusa shu jing. 
24, AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Siirarigama(samadhi)siitra.'” 
Pasadika translates the title of this work as "Contemplation 

Leading to Power", Lamotte as "Le Concentration de la Marche 

Héroique". 

Rather than attempt a summary, we provide an excerpt from a 
discussion of the opening topic by George Teschner.'? 

"In the beginning of the Sarangama Sitra, the Buddha asks 
Ananda where the perceptions of the eyes and the activities of the 
mind are. Ananda replies that the eyes are on the face and the mind 
is within the body...Ananda's reply has erroneously located mind 
within body and body within the external world, whereas, for the 
Sirangama, both body and the world are phenomena of the mind. 
If the mind is within the body, the mind should see the inside of the 
body, the Sirangama Sitra reasons...Since the mind does not see 
the interior of the body, the relationship between mind and body 
cannot be conceived of as an observer within a room looking 
through a window at what is outside. Ananda then argues that the 
mind may be like a lamp placed outside a house. What lies outside 
is illuminated whereas what lies within is hidden in darkness...The 
Buddha uses two arguments against this position... (I)f consciousness 
is placed outside the body, then there seems to be no way of 
explaining how each could be aware of the internal states of the 
other...Similarly, in placing consciousness outside the body, Ananda 
then is unable to account for the perspectival character of each 
individual's perception... 

"“Ananda...accounts for why there is not an awareness of the body 


94 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


by saying the body is like an almost perfectly transparent bowl 
placed over the eyes...The Buddha objects that although the eye is 
able to see through the bowl, it is, nevertheless, still able to see the 
bowl, whereas mind, in the same way, is not able to see the sense 
organs. 

"If the mind cannot see the inside of the body and also cannot be 
outside it since it interacts with the body, then Ananda concludes it 
must be in some sense between the body and external things. The 
Buddha asks where is this place between? If it is between 
external things and the body, in the sense that it is just beneath the 
surface of the body, then it is within the body and should see the 
inside. If it is between, in the sense of having a location among 
external things, then it should see things, including the body, from 
an unchanging perspective. If the mind is between...then the mind 
must consist of a duality of which one part is able to interact with 
the conscious perceiver and the other part with the insentient 
object. The question then becomes, how could these two opposing 
realities combine in the same being? 

"The difficulty throughout the dialogue is that Ananda is 
attempting to conceive of the relation between mind and body 
according to some spatial relation. To say that the mind is inside the 
body does not accord with the nature of perception as interpreted 
by Ananda; to say it is outside the body cannot explain how the 
mind and body interact or have experiences in common; to say that 
it is in between would suffer from both the foregoing difficulties... 

The entire polemic is a reductio ad absurdum argument. Ananda 
is unable to consider a reality which is without location but which, 
nevertheless, enters into a relationship with the body and external 
objects. In order to do this, he must in the Siirangama be brought 
to understand that the reality of spatial relationships is a 


phenomenon of the mind and that there are no spatial relationships 
in themselves..." 


25. AUTHOR UNKNOWN (130), Dharmacakrapravartanasitra.'“ 


26. AUTHOR UNKNOWN (130), Maitreyapariprechasitra’® 


27. AUTHOR UNKNOWN (150), Ugra(datta)pariprechasitra.'© 
Nancy Schuster believes that this is one of the earliest Mahayana 


UGRAPARIPRCCHA 95 


siitras.” It is one of a group of works about a householder named 
"Ugra", stories about whom probably go back to earliest Buddhist 
times. In the first part of this sutra Ugra is counseled by the 
Buddha on how to live life properly as a "householder bodhisattva". 
The second part gives advice to bodhisattvas who have gone forth 
(pravrajita) from their homes to the forest to seek knowledge. 
"There, they realize that all fears arise from the sense of self, and in 
the forest they get rid of all sense of self. Then for them all dharmas 
become quiescent, they are attached to no divarmas whatsoever, 
sense perceptions do not deceive them, they are content in the 
aGryavamsa" (the tradition of nobles), "contented through 
understanding (prajfid), and able to take on the "heavy burden’ of 
worldly existence. When the sense of self has disappeared because 
of understanding, the pravrajita bodhisattva can then fulfill the six 
perfections." 

"Finally, when fear is destroyed and the sense of self is lost, the 
pravrajita bodhisattva is to go down to the towns and villages to 
teach Dharma to the people, and to study it further himself with 
teachers who are to be deeply revered forever for the sake of the 
precious gifts they have given. After all this, he can at last practice 
pure Sila, pure samadhi and pure prajfia.""°° 


28. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Chengju guangming dingyi jing." 

"Mahayana scripture treating two different subjects. The first part 
is devoted to the Six Perfections (paramita) and the "Mental 
Concentration of Integral Illumination". The second part contains 
a description of the moral and religious duties of various classes of 
lay devotees." 


29. AUTHOR UNKNOWN (150), Larger Sukhavativyiihastitra."” 

This work can be briefly summarized thus: 

1-4. The Buddha tells Ananda the names of eighty-two previous 
Bodhisattvas, culminating in Lokesvararaja and his pupil 
Dharmakara who are present at the gathering. 

5-10. Dharmakara, after five eons of study, returns to the Buddha 
and makes forty-eight (or forty-six) vows of Bodhisattvahood, 
promising not to attain enlightenment until everyone else does. He 
follows this with a number of verses extolling the Buddha. 

11-38. The Buddha tells Ananda that Dharmakara now presides 


96 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


over the country called Sukhavati as the Bodhisattva Amitabha, 
whose virtues he praises. He goes on to describe the wonders of 
Sukhavati in detail. 

39-end. The Buddha provides Ananda with a vision of Sukhavati. 
He then explains who goes to Sukhavati, viz., backsliding or 
doubting Bodhisattvas. 


30. AUTHOR UNKNOWN (150), Smaller Sukhavativyitha’? 

The Buddha teaches Sariputra of the world of Sukhavati, where 
Amitayus (whose name means "immeasurably long life") lives. 
Sukhavati's marvels are described, and the name of the Buddhas 
who dwell there are listed. They will not return again to the world, 
since they possess understanding. 


31. AUTHOR UNKNOWN (150), Ratnagunasamcayagatha.'* 

This is, at least in part, a summary in 302 verses of 
5.Astasahasrika. Conze translated the title as "Verses on the 
Perfection of Wisdom Which is the Storehouse of Precious Virtues". 
It exists in five recensions, two in Sanskrit, two in Tibetan, and one 
in Chinese. Akira Yuyama, who has studied this text closely, 
remarks "The Rgs...appears to be the only extant Prajiiaparamita 
text written in the so-called Buddhist Sanskrit language. 

Edward Conze has made an English translation of the version 
ascribed to Haribhadra and translated into Chinese in 1001.'% 
Conze believed the 41 verses of the first two chapters may date to 
100 B.C. and "constitute the original Prajiiaparamita...""'® He has 
provided a survey of the contents.!!® 


32. AUTHOR UNKNOWN (150), Gandavyitha.'!” 

"The main theme of the Gandavyiiha is the bodhisattva's quest for 
enlightenment...Alternatively...it is the progress from seeing the 
universe as ordinary people see it, when filled with attachment and 
petty, selfish desires, to seeing it as the (true) bodhisattva sees it. 
In the former aspect it is known as the ‘element of the world’ 
(lokadhdtu), in the latter as the ‘element of phenomena’ 
(dharmadhatu), i.e., the ultimate reality..." 

"In the course of this description we learn more about the 
ultimate reality, the element of phenomena, and the main 
contribution of the Gandavyitha to philosophy: the conception of the 





GANDAVYUHA 97 


perfect interpenetration of everything in the universe, in which 
everything is as if reflected in everything else, without any mutual 
obstruction. The phenomenal and transcendental universes are 
identical, with separateness of phenomena on the surface but perfect 
harmony and unity within..."""* 


NAGARJUNA 


As with Samkaracarya in the Hindu context, Nagarjuna, 
sometimes called the "father" of Indian philosophy, has been 
identified as the author of a vast number of texts. Scholars have 
devoted a good deal of effort to the attempt to pick out which of 
these ascriptions of authorship applies to the Nagarjuna who was 
resposible for the 33.(Mula)Madhyamakakdrikds (MK), clearly the 
fundamental work of Madhyamaka Buddhism. Discussion of his 
works can be found by a variety of scholars."° We follow the 
discussion of Christian Lindmer in picking out the relatively small 
number of texts-summarized here as having been written by the 
author of MK. It seems likely that several different authors, living 
from the third to the eighth or ninth centuries, were responsible for 
the various works identified by tradition as being by Nagarjuna; 
their dates are guessed at in the various works ascribed to 
"Nagarjuna" subsequently in our coverage. 

Little to nothing is known about the first Nagarjuna, who he was 
and when and where he lived, even his date. He appears to have 
come from the Andhra district. Nalinaksha Dutt reports that he was 
born in Vidarbha (Berar), but lived his life in South India, passing 
his last days at Sriparvata (modern Srigailam).! He is said to have 
also lived for a time at Nalanda. There are various works 
celebrating his life, but they provide no firm historical information. 
Given the difficulty of determining the authorship of works ascribed 
to him, it can be suspected that even the few meager facts just 
noted may apply to another Nagarjuna than the one presently under 
discussion. 

As for Nagarjuna's date, it is variously estimated between the first 
century and 250 A.D. Since the encyclopedic Mahavibhasa 


98 


contributors do not seem to know or include him we may guess he 
lived after the meeting that spawned that great compendium. We 
have estimated 150 A.D. in this Volume, but with no great 
conviction. The most cogent reason for not placing him as much as 
a hundred years later has mainly to do with the apparently close 
relation of some of his putative opponents with positions and 
arguments appearing in the Nyayasijtras of Gautama, but since the 
most cogent reason for dating Gautama at 150 A.D. is the very same 
relationship we are not provided with any certainty about dates.’” 


33. NAGARJUNA, (Mila) Madhyamakakarikas 
In the following summary "E" refers to P.L.Vaidya's edition, 
Buddhist Sanskrit Texts No. 10. Darbhanga 1960. "T" references are 
to Frederick J. Streng's Emptiness: A Study in Religious Meaning 
(Nashville, N.Y.1967).” 


Summary by Christian Lindtner 


This is Nagarjuna's philosophical masterpiece, as proved by the 
work's scope and character. It consists of 448 verses divided into 27 
chapters (prakarana). Some of the verses! are fundamental to the 
topic, or axiomatic, while the rest are mostly destructive 
argumentation. Chapters XVIII, XVI and XXVII have a special role, 
as we see later. 

The central position of this work is indirectly shown by the great 
influence it had in later times. In India alone at least ten 
commentaries and two subcommentaries are known to have been 
written, but several of these are no longer extant. Today we have 
only 137-Akutobhaya, incorrectly ascribed to Nagarjuna, 
Buddhapilita's commentary and Bhavya's Prajfiapradipa, to which 
Avalokitavrata wrote a mammoth subcommentary. These texts exist 
now only in Tibetan translation. The lone extant Sanskrit 
commentary is Candrakirti's Prasannapadaé, written with a 
knowledge of the first three, but earlier than Avalokitavrata's 
encyclopedic work. All these are indispensable for an assessment of 
the role of the MK, and I have combed them thoroughly. In Chinese 
there is Pingala's Zhonglun (T. 1564) and Sthiramati's Dacheng 
zhongguan shilun (T. 1567). Pingala's commentary is closely related 





MADHYAMAKAKARIKAS 99 


to Akutobhaya [our #137], either a free translation or based on the 
same (now lost) source as the Akutobhayad. But I have only made 
occasional use of the Chinese translations, and never against the 
other authorities. This is principally because of the uncertainty 
inherent in the Chinese versions, especially when the subject is 
philosophical. One can get the general meaning and often guess the 
original Sanskrit term when one is familiar with the translator's 
technique, but many doubtful points always remain. Philologically 
this is not good enough, let alone for an abstract philosophical text. 
It is quite certain that there must have been many passages that 
were quite incomprehensible, even misleading, for the Chinese 
reader. 

My summary of the MK is based on my edition of the Sanskrit 
text (Copenhagen 1982). I have, as said, consulted the 
commentaries carefully but, nevertheless, in a number of cases 
deliberately neglected them to follow instead the principle that an 
author is his own best commentator. In a few cases there can be no 
doubt that what the commentaries offer is no more than intelligent 
guesses. 

Before going into the separate chapters, it would be profitable to 
consider the work as a whole. The overriding intention of the 
author is evident from the introductory pcan (incorrectly 
considered spurious by some scholars) and the last verse of Chapter 
XXVIL. Buddha has shown that the True Doctrine is conditioned co- 
origination (pratityasamutpdda), which points beyond the 
multiplicity of the world of experience to an ineffable peace 
removed from all and every contradiction. MK sets out to prove 
that the correct understanding of pratityasamutpdda is synonymous 


- with the elimination of all the speculative views and dogmas (drsti) 


championed by one or more Buddhist schools. It is important to 
note that the argumentation is throughout strictly methodical. 
Nagarjuna can lead with a "negative" proposition, or the opponent 
can submit a "positive" view. Then the formal possibilities and 
alternatives are stated one by one, purely hypothetically. The 
inescapable conclusion is that neither the view that is being 
oe nor its opposite, can stand up to a critical scrutiny which, 
e é sure, avails itself of specific logical reasons for "nonorigination" 

a means of forcing the opponent into absurdity. 

The question of the topics and sequences of the chapters is 


100 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


interesting, and not quite straightforward. The Indian 
commentators have not paid it any attention, taking the chapters as 
they come, and leaving it up to an imaginary opponent to decide 
the next issue on the agenda. Can one see a progression in the 
work, or could one envisage a change in the argument or the 
chapter sequence without too much disturbance? Serious matters 
like momentariness and the independent existence of consciousness, 
discussed in some of the author's other works, could for my part 
well have had a chapter in MK, but the fact remains, it did not 
happen. As far as I can see there are intimations of a progression, 
in MK as in most other works by Nagarjuna, but nothing more. A 
theme is dealt with, you go on to a new one, and back to the old 
one again. On the other hand, one must not overlook the fact that 
topics dealt with only once are treated systematically and 
consistently. This is best seen in MK and 34.Vigrahavyavartani, and 
also in 36.Vaidalya, where the sixteen basic concepts of the Nyaya 
school are rejected step by step. 

My view of all this is that we have eight loosely connected 
"groups" of chapters: Chapters I-II attack the two cornerstones of the 
ontology of the archenemy, the Sarvastivada, namely, causality and 
the movement of the dharmas, which are the natural prerequisites 
for any sort of causality. The next three chapters belong together 
in that they deal with "everything that exists," that is to say, the five 
skandhas (IV), the twelve/eighteen bases (III), and the six elements 
(V). The eighteen elements were indirectly disposed of in Chapter 
Ill. Chapter VI investigates the relation between desire and the 
desiring subject, but this is obviously an arbitrary choice, dictated by 
"rhetorical" motive. The real subject is coexistence (sahabhava), a 
key concept in the Sarvastivada type of causal theory in which 
independent dharmas are assumed to enter just such a coexistence, 
whether, as in this instance, it is an action-agent relationship, or in 
any other way. Chapter VII disproves the three characteristics, 
origination, duration, and cessation, inseparable from anything 
causally created, that is, composite (samskrta), and to that extent 
elaborates the discussion on causation. In addition Chapter VII has 
a long digression criticising an auxiliary hypothesis of the 
Vatsiputriya (Sammitiya), a school that makes its first appearance 
here. One could say that VII. 34 is a sort of preliminary conclusion 
to I-VII: Objective multiplicity considered as a series of independent 


MADHYAMAKAKARIKAS 101 


factors subjected to change according to a given causal pattern is 
illusory. 

Chapters VIII-X have a strong thematic connection, attacking the 
thesis peculiar to the Vatsiputriya of the existence of a personal 
substance (a "soul"), which is its own creative principle, and for 
which the physical and psychical components of the personality are 
merely instruments in samsara. In Chapter X, as in Chapter VI, one 
concrete example is taken from the set to illustrate how an 
ontological entity is disproved. 

Chapter XI brings us on to new ground, in my opinion connecting 
up with Chapters XII and XIII. Nagarjuna discourses here on 
"things" in their widest generality. Samsara is limitless in space and 
time (Chapter XI). Therefore everything bounded by samsara is 
without a beginning and without limits. This is in fact the 
ontological raison d'etre behind Nagarjuna's attack on all the 
distinctions and entities of discursive thought. Chapter XI, though 
brief, is a vital part of the work. In Chapter XII, with suffering as 
the particular case (as in Chapters VI and X), things in general are 
also shown to be indeterminate by the very fact that they are 
"nonoriginated." They cannot be created from themselves, from 
anything else, both, or neither. The purpose of Chapter XIII was 
evidently to forestall the objection that however Nagarjuna may 
disprove things in general in Chapters XI and XII, is not the 
inconstancy of the empirical world a palpable fact that only a fool 
would deny? No, because alteration (anyathabhava) is a logical 
impossibility. 

In the next four chapters Nagarjuna concentrates again on 
specifically Buddhist concepts. Chapter XIV resumes a theme from 
Chapter III, which is also found in Chapter VI: Even admitting that 
the twelve bases and the eighteen elements exist, they cannot 
possibly enter into combination. Chapter XIV establishes that the 
Sarvastivadin's belief in an immutable svabhava is both illogical and 
unorthodox. Whereas Chapter XI assumed that the reality of 
Samsara (i.e., on the level of relative truth), transmigration is 
rejected in Chapter XVI because neither the five skandhas nor the 
“soul” (the Vatsiputriya concept) can in any way be said to migrate. 
Therefore there is no nirvana either, the idea of absolute truth that 
can hold only in contrast to samsdra. (For the two truths see 
Chapter XxIv.) Chapter XVII is about karma, a central concept 


102 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


closely connected with that of samsara. It begins (verses 1-20) with 
a very detailed account from the relative standpoint of karma's 
nature and aspects in relation to the various schools of Abhidharma. 
In the absolute sense there is nothing that is called karma (verses 
21-33). 

Chapter XVIII is not well-arranged, but it does, in a very 
condensed manner, give a better idea of the essence of the author's 
own philosophy than any other chapter in MK. The belief in "I" and 
"mine" (ie., the five skandhas) is due to discursive thought 
(vikalpa), which, again, is due to ignorance. This vikalpa produces 
the defilements (klesa), which again activate karma, which in turn 
leads to rebirth. Emptiness is the weapon that destroys the 
expanded world (prapafica) forming the basis of vikalpa. The 
absolute truth, liberation, is beyond praparfica, and therefore nothing 
can be said about it. So the Buddhas can preach one doctrine at one 
time, or its exact opposite at another time, depending on the needs 
and presuppositions of their audience. There are three groups of 
Buddhists, and it is depth of insight that distinguishes them from 
one another. 

Chapter XIX leads rather abruptly back to a typical Sarvastivada 
problem: the three periods of the factors, in one word, time. The 
same goes for Chapters XX and XXI, the critical examination of 
causality and of existence-cessation. They give an added emphasis 
to the criticism in Chapter I, and together with Chapter XIX they can 
be considered as a sort of appendix to Chapter I. 

Chapters XIX-XXI tolled the knell for the long-drawn-out 
refutation of the two major Buddhist dogmatic schools, Sarvastivada 
and Vatsiputriya. All possible views were shown to be empty in the 
absolute sense. Chapters XXII-XXIV are coherent in the sense that 
they have no regard for the holiest of the holies for any Buddhist, 
the concept of Tathagata, the Buddha himself (XXII); the four 
misconceptions, that is, the ignorance in which Buddha found the 
cause for the sufferings of existence (XXIII); the four noble truths, 
and even the highest goal for Buddhism, nirvana (XXV); all so that 
Nagarjuna could ram home his basic idea of the emptiness of things. 
These four chapters effectively conclude the author's rejection of all 
conceivable dogmas (drsti). 

The last two chapters in MK are not polemical. On first reading 
it is rather an anticlimax because Nagarjuna has obviously deigned 


MADHYAMAKAKARIKAS 103 


to come down to the relative plane, without the rhetorical élan of 
the Absolute. The role of these chapters is to show how important 
it was for the author to be considered a good Buddhist. According 
to tradition, it was during the night of his enlightenment that 
Buddha became aware of the twelve members from whose activity 
suffering stemmed. The interpretation of this formula of the twelve 
members has always been regarded as problematic and crucial. 
Therefore, in Chapter XXVI Nagarjuna must emphasize that the 
realization of emptiness provides exactly the means desired to 
terminate the ignorance which, as the first member of the formula, 
is at the bottom of the occurrence of suffering. Moreover, in the 
oldest canonical texts we sometimes see that the Buddha warns 
against the acceptance of sixteen dogmas which presuppose that 
either the "soul" or the world should be finite or infinite with respect 
to time (eternal, etc.). As announced in the two introductory 
verses, and in the final verse of the work, it is precisely these two 
dogmatic extremes that Nagarjuna has tried to avoid by enlisting 
emptiness. It is essential to embrace this doctrine if one wishes to 
understand the Buddha correctly. The purpose of the two final 
chapters, then, is immediately obvious once one remembers that MK 
is addressed to Buddhist monks, some of whom in the course of 
their study of this revolutionary manual of meditation may well 
have had their doubts about the orthodoxy of its author. 

Basically Nagarjuna only has one criterion of true reality, namely, 
that something, in order to be real, must exist in and by itself. All 
his arguments can be reduced to this presupposition. Experience and 
logic, however, amply show that nothing whatsoever meets this 
demand. Hence everything is unreal "ontologically" speaking. His 
arguments are by no means intended to add to our knowledge or 
even to correct any positive knowledge that we may already have. 
On the contrary, they presuppose that we already have a view of the 
world, as had his first readers, too much of it, according to 
Nagarjuna. In the sense that Nagarjuna’s arguments start by 
presupposing what they end up discarding they are certainly of 
dubious "scientific" value. On the other hand, Nagarjuna never really 
pretends that his arguments are more than means of getting rid of 
what we believe that we already know. As such they are obviously 
effective and "psychologically" valid. The real philosophical problem 
in Madhyamaka is the problem of two truths, two degrees or kinds 


104 


of reality, depending on the eyes that see. But this is a problem that 
cannot be solved "scientifically", there being no relational bridge 
linking the two together. The acceptance of the distinction between 
two truths is based on an act of faith, not of reason. It may, of 
course, be supported by subsequent reasoning (yukti), but it is still 
based on faith in the value of Buddhist tradition (agama). 
Philosophy is but the handmaid of religion. MK was never meant 
to be read isolated from its religious Mahayana background 
(Ratnavali, Stitrasamuccaya, etc.) 

The question of the value of Nagarjuna's arguments, then, is a 
strictly "subjective" or personal matter. Nagarjuna himself is 
perfectly aware that this is so. One must therefore assess his 
arguments in much the same way as one would assess rhetorical 
arguments, namely, on the basis of their powers of persuasion. Such 
arguments, as we know very well, are often, if not always, much 
more efficient than dry and rational ones. Nagarjuna knew that too. 
So, in the study of MK the real problems that we are faced with are 
of a psychological rather than of a philosophical nature. 

The fact that Nagarjuna soon had to write two supplements to 
MK--for this is how we have to regard his Vigrahavyavartani and 
Siinyatasaptati--shows that MK did not meet with unconditioned 
approval in all quarters of Buddhism. 

In the following analysis of each of the twenty-seven chapters I 
concentrate on pointing out the flow and structure of the 
arguments. 


CHAPTER I: Investigation of the Four Conditions’ 


(The target for the reasoned argument of the introductory 
chapter is the theory of causation in scholastic Buddhism 
(Sarvastivada) according to which four conditions (see verse two) 
determine how a given factor arises as a particular concept in the 
mind of a particular individual at a given time.) 

3-4 of E; 1-2 of T (E4, 26; T183) Nagarjuna bases himself on this 
encapsulation of the world-view of Mahayana in formulating his first 
and fundamental thesis: "There is no origination whatsoever", to 
which his opponent rejoins that a given factor does in fact arise 
when the four conditions (cause, supporting object, proximate 
condition and dominant factor) are present. 





MADHYAMAKAKARIKAS 105 


5-12 of E; 3-10 of T (E26-30; T183-184) Nagarjuna denies that 
the four conditions could be the ground for any origination. It 
would be generally agreed that something dependent cannot be 
anything in its own right, and consequently not in virtue of anything 
else either. It is also impossible to define a relation between 
conditions and the process that produces the effect. Conditions can, 
hypothetically, only be restrictions on something existing or not 
existing, but both alternatives are absurd. Therefore the first of the 
four conditions, a cause producing the factor, is out of the question. 
The second condition, a supporting object of consciousness, is otiose 
in the light of the assertion that a given conceptual factor is 
sufficient in itself. As no concept has arisen, a "proximate" condition 
cannot be precedent to anything, and has even less claim to be a 
condition at all. Nor can the fourth, the dominant factor, allegedly 
a necessary concomitant for the production of a particular thing, be 
established, since it is proved that nothing independently exists. 

13-16 of E; 11-14 of T (E30-31; T184) Having dismissed the four 
conditions, Nagarjuna - just to be sure - attacks the complementary 
concept, effect. An effect cannot be produced by conditions because 
it is not contained in them. But if it could, all the same, be 
produced without ever having been in the conditions beforehand, 
then it could just as well have been produced by the wrong 
conditions. Moreover, the effect cannot possess the nature of the 
conditions, that is, be identical with them, for they are nothing in 
themselves. The conclusion is that there is no effect whatsoever, 
therefore no condition of any sort attached to it.) 





1.In this chapter Nagarjuna is pleading for the central concept of 
Mahayana, nonorigination, by showing that since both conditions 
(cause) and effect are empty notions, the concept of origination, 
which naturally presumes the reality of condition and effect, lacks 
a logical function. 

It is not without good reason that Nagarjuna, in the introduction 
to his principal work, directs his criticism against the elaboration of 
causation theory which is peculiar to the Sarvastivada school. The 
argument that follows will confirm that its dogmatic posture 
constituted in Nagarjuna's eyes the most serious threat to the proper 
acquisition of the Budha's teaching. 


106 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
CHAPTER II: Investigation of Motion'*> 


1-7 (E33-35; T184-185) Nagarjuna's first thesis is that motion 
cannot be localized in any of the three aspects of time, to which the 
opponent replies that movement really occurs in a passing (gati) in 
the course of a place's being passed (gata). But, says Nagarjuna, this 
implies that the place will be devoid of passing (which is 
unthinkable, but unavoidable), since by definition that which is 
passively passed is that which is being passed, while active passing 
passes. Otherwise, if the place was not devoid of passing, there 
would be two passings, one for the active member and one for the 
passive, which is absurd. 

8-21 (E35-39; T185-186) Having thus dismissed the concept of 
a passing being passed, and implicitly a passing going on there, 
Nagarjuna turns to the passing subject as such, with an, analogous 
argument. Supposing there was movement after all, where and 
when should its motion begin? Motion is purely illogical. In the 
same way, the opposite concept, cessation, is shown to be illogical. 
Who should stop and when? Furthermore, the movement and its 
subject cannot be conceived either as identical or different and 
therefore, being indeterminate, cannot be established. 

22-25 (E40; T186) Finally, motion cannot be established on the 
ground that the subject performs an action that makes it traverse a 
certain distance. In that case the subject must surely be separate 
from the action in order to avoid identity of agent and 
object. But it is not. Whether the subject existed or not, it would 
not be able to accomplish anything. The conclusion is that there is 
no movement, because it cannot be established in any of its three 


(grammatically, as we would add) conceivable aspects.! 


a 


1.Obviously, Nagarjuna's argument against motion is applicable in 
Principle to any realistic world-view, but it is the Sarvastivada 
school that figures most prominently for Nagarjuna. The central 
concept for them was: Things are eternal in their essential nature 
(svabhava), but in their passage through the three periods of time 
they appear as impermanent forms of existence (bhava). 





MADHYAMAKAKARIKAS 107 
CHAPTER III: Investigation of the Sense-Bases’”° 


(Chapters III-V are closely connected, as all three examine the 
components that in one way or another can be said to make up an 
individual. The individual as a conscious being presupposes twelve 
senses, consisting of the six sense organs and the corresponding six 
sense objects. Each of these six sets form the ground for a 
corresponding awareness.)' 

1-8 (in E43-47); 1-9 (in T186-187) The opponent defends the 
twelve sense-bases. Nagarjuna argues that since sight cannot see 
itself, it cannot see other things either. It was customary in debate 
to justify such arguments by an example (drstanta), but the example 
of fire (or a torch, see VII, 8-12) used here is invalid according to 
the argument of II.1. This means that the opponent has to give up 
his initial thesis, and therefore Nagarjuna can conclude that neither 
sight nor nonsight, obviously, and far less the presumed seeing 
subject, can see anything at all. This subject could not in any case 
be determined as identical with or different from sight. Therefore 
neither sight as the organ of sense, nor anything else visible such as 
form (i.e., shape and color) have any existence. In the same way, 
neither consciousness, contact, feeling, desire nor appropriating have 
any existence. Similarly with the ten remaining senses.” 


CHAPTER IV: Investigation of the Five Aggregates)?” 


1.These three chapters were later supplemented by 
35.Siinyatdsaptati 45-57. 


2.This chapter has shown one of Nagarjuna's philosophical 
presuppositions: An activity can only be considered real if it can be 
directed against itself, that is, if it is entirely independent. Moreover 
we see Nagarjuna arguing on a relative level: An assertion (paksa) 
Must be supported by a valid example to be acceptable (cf. 
34.Vigrahavyavartani 21-27). Finally, one may note that the fact 
that he takes up sight (rather than one of the other bases) is 
opie by Bhavasamkrantisitra, a canonical text to which he often 
udes. 


108 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


1-7 (E48-49; T187) Nagarjuna begins by noting that physical 
form (riipa) is neither the same as nor different from its component 
matter (riipakdrana). If it were different, it would lack a cause, and 
if matter were different from form, it would not be a cause and thus 
form would not be its effect. Whether form is assumed to exist or 
not, it cannot possibly have a cause. Nor can form be different from 
matter, since it would then lack a cause. Thus it cannot be 
determined either as having a cause or as having no cause. This 
leads to the general statement that cause and effect are neither 
identical nor different. Similarly for the other four aggregates, and 
in general for any concept whatsoever. 

8-9 (E49-50; T188) Nagarjuna's next two verses are of 
fundamental import, though at first sight unrelated to the above. 
Whatever the champion of universal emptiness propounds or 
explains, his basic position is that whatever objection the opponent 
may make, every concept that his argument is based on can be 
refuted as being empty. 


CHAPTER V: Investigation of the Six Elements’ 


1-7 (E51-53; T188-189) The Buddha has said that an individual 
is composed of six elements: earth, water, fire, air, akaga and 
consciousness. Each has its distinguishing trait, to be firm, flowing, 
etc. Nagarjuna comments that akdasa, for example, distinguished as 
such, cannot exist in advance of its characteristic mark. There is in 
fact nothing which can do so. Therefore the mark itself cannot 
begin to operate, either in association with what is already 
distinguished or with what is not, and there is no third possibility. 
Consequently there can be nothing, no substance or subject, that is 
distinguished. Therefore a thing like Gkaga cannot be conceived as 
either unmarked or marked, nor can anything besides these two be 
said to exist. Therefore one cannot talk of the negation of a thing, 
its absence, and even less of a peculiar subject that is supposed to 
be different from existing or nonexistent things. The other elements 
likewise. 

8 (E54; T189) It must be recognized that those who view things 
in positive-negative contradictions will never get behind the curtain 





MADHYAMAKAKARIKAS 109 


of empirical illusion. ! 


CHAPTER VI: Investigation of Attachment and Attached’? 


1-10 (E55-58; T189-190) The three "vices", attachment, aversion 
and delusion, have their source in.conceptual notions which form 
the basis for karma leading to rebirth in the circuit of existence. 
But, as Nagarjuna explains, attachment cannot arise, whether the 
attached subject has come into existence or not. Likewise, the 
attached subject cannot begin to exist prior to his attachment. Nor 
can the two be simultaneous, as they would each have to have 
independent existence, but that is impossible, whether they are 
treated as identical, or different while simultaneous, and there is no 
third option. But supposing that they did exist as different side by 
side, that would not make sense, and it is out of the question that 
they could belong together. On the other hand, they would not be 
anything together unless they were different. That they can each 
separately have meaning must be excluded. The conclusion is that 
correlatives like attachment/attached cannot be described either as 
having independent existence or as having simultaneous 


relationship. 


1.Now Nagarjuna has rejected the six elements on the ground that 
they cannot be defined as mark, marked, existing or nonexistent. 
As the sequel will show, this does not imply that Nagarjuna cancels 
the practical validity of these concepts. On the contrary, for him 
speculation and dogmatic pronouncements on these concepts are the 
source of utter misery, because one tends to treat the concepts as 
entities with substance, and thereby fails to grasp the purpose of the 
Buddha's teaching. 


2.Nagarjuna shows here that vices, etc., are not precisely delimited 
concepts whether considered together or separately. Therefore they 
Cannot be established as real. This analysis has confirmed the 
Saying of the Buddha that the vices are due to conceptual notions. 


110 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
CHAPTER VII: Investigation of the Conditioned’? 


1-3 (E59-60; 190) Everything in the empirical world is composite, 
associated with the three marks origination, duration and 
destruction. But what of origination, for instance, itself? Is it, 
Nagarjuna asks, composite like everything else, and thus itself 
subject to duration, etc.? He remarks parenthetically that none of 
the three marks, separately or as a unit, could mark the composite, 
and adds that the three marks cannot possibly be themselves 
composite because that would mean recursion to infinity. 

4 (E60; T190) To avoid the unspoken absurdity that the three are 
alternatively noncomposite, the opponent (Vatsiputriya) puts 
forward an ancillary hypothesis that the ordinary or initial "radical" 
(mila) origination", being composite, must also be subject to an 
origination, the “origination of origination," which is in turn brought 
into existence by the radical origination which it has itself brought 
about. In this ingenious way, the opponent thinks, the proposition 
that everything, origination included, is composite is thus upheld 
and recursion to infinity is avoided. 

5-13 (E61-64; T190-191) All right, answers Nagarjuna, but how 
can the radical origination be brought about the very first time? It 
cannot be brought about by the origination of the origination which 
the radical origination itself still has to bring about without help. 
Obviously, the radical origination cannot be produced at the very 
moment of birth, since the origination of the origination must by 
that time already be real. Now the opponent could say that the 
radical origination produces itself, simultaneously with the 
origination of the origination, on the analogy of a torch, which 
operates on itself and on other things, in particular the dark. 
Nagarjuna explains that on the one hand this analogy does not fit, 
so that the thesis of an activity directed towards itself and other 
things is untenable, and on the other hand, it would be nonsensical 
if the radical origination, once it has properly arisen, begins to 
produce the origination of the origination. 

14-21 (E64-67; T191) The concept of origination is criticized now 
from a different point of view. It cannot take place in any division 
of time. As for the "thing that arises", it cannot be allowed to be 
prior to or simultaneous with "origination". The two concepts are 
properly speaking correlative (pratitya). Only if the thing existed 





MADHYAMAKAKARIKAS 111 


before its origination could it arise, but it does not. The thing that 
arises cannot be due to the origination either, since that could not 
be established either on the basis of another origination (which 
would imply the absurdity of recursion) or without a cause. 
Moreover, neither the existing nor the nonexistence can undergo a 
process of origination, and certainly not something that is decaying. 
The alternative to this last, that something once arose, never to 
decay, is unthinkable. 

22-25 (E68; T191-192) Having rejected arising from several 
perspectives, the second characteristic of the composite, duration, 
is rejected analogously. There is neither anything that endures nor 
any duration as such. 

26-32 (E69-71; T192) The conclusion is that since these 
characteristics, origination, etc., are, on closer scrutiny, 
unsubstantiated, they cannot distinguish anything composite. 
Therefore the logical antithesis to anything composite, the 
uncomposite, is also excluded. The three concepts are, in other 
words, purely and simply illusory.’ 


CHAPTER VIII: Investigation of Agent/Action’*" 


(Chapters VIII-X form a thematic group, because they disprove 
the concept of a person from three points of view. From the first 
angle, the person is considered as an agent, who realizes existence 
by means of appropriating assuming the five aggregates.) 

1-13 (E75-80; T192-193) Nagarjuna's thesis is that the agent, 
whether existent or not, does not perform any action. This is 
justified in detail as follows: The concept "existent" excludes the 
concept of empirical activity. If agent and action exist, they could, 
of course, exist without each other. If they do not exist, it would be 
purely arbitrary whether a nonexistent agent did anything. It would 





1.Although Nagarjuna would be the last person to deny origination, 
€tc., in the empirical, conventional sense, he has shown, as 
foreshadowed in the introductory verse, that they cannot be 
€stablished in the ultimate sense. These concepts are definitively 
empty. 


112 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


unleash a string of consequences absurd for a Buddhist if strict 
causality were denied. The next five verses, with less logical 
content than usual, reject all possible agent-action relationships. The 
two concepts are correlative, nothing in themselves. This line of 
argument can also be used to dismiss agent-action concepts other 
than the "person" and appropriating. By adducing that the existence 
must be invariably inactive and that the nonexistent cannot possibly 
be active, Nagarjuna has disproved agent over against action. 


CHAPTER IX: Investigation of a Grasper and His Support.'*? 


1-2 (E81; 193) Now one could maintain, along with one of the 
schools (Vatsiputriya), that there really does exist a person or self 
prior to or after any kind of sense-perception or internal emotion, 
since these phenomena must surely belong to someone, that is, to 
a person. 

3-12 (E81-84; T194) But, Nagarjuna replies, if the person should 
exist prior to sight, e.g., and then take possession of sight, sight 
should also be able to exist beforehand independently of the person. 
But this makes no sense. Thus they are indissolubly linked. The 
opponent thinks he can save his case by admitting that there is no 
person prior to sensations, but different ones bobbing up all the 
time. But, answers Nagarjuna, whether it is the same person that 
shows up like that, or a different one, with no third possibility, it 
would in either case be absurd. Moreover, the person is not to be 
found in the basic elements. The conclusion is that a pre-empirical 
person does not exist, and consequently his sight, etc., do not exist 
either. It cannot be said to exist, or, by that very fact, not to exist.! 


1.Thus Nagarjuna has denied the existence of a person, without 
confirming his nonexistence. Nagarjuna is convinced, as we shall 
see, that this posture, neither affirming nor denying, is the most 
faithful transmission of the Buddha's attitude toward all speculations 
that lead away from liberation or spiritual freedom. 


MADHYAMAKAKARIKAS 113 
CHAPTER X: Investigation of Fire-Fuel'** 


1-16 (E86-92; T194-196) We see in the canon that the 
relationship between the "person" and the appropriating (i.e., the 
five aggregates) is modelled on the analogy of fire and fuel. This 
could be taken to imply that the person and the appropriating 
actually exist independently of each other. But, replies Nagarjuna, 
person and appropriating cannot really be considered as either 
identical or different, and so cannot be constituted as real. It would 
be absurd if the first existed independently. If the opponent points 
out that something can actually be burning, that is, fuel, he must 
explain what sets it on fire. It is absurd that a tongue of fire should 
independently come from nowhere and set it on fire. Fire and fuel 
(as fuel) occur only in interdependence (Gpeksya). Moreover it 
would involve the mistake of establishing an already established fire. 
Next come two verses on interdependence in general. In 
interdependence one member is not given beforehand, and even if 
it could be so, why should it enter into correlation? This rule is of 
course valid for fire-fuel as well. The conclusion is that the relation 
fire-fuel cannot be established, not even from other possible 
viewpoints. To postulate an independent person in relation to 
i or its cognizer is thus the enunciation of a conceptual 
iction. 


CHAPTER XI: Investigation of the Round of Rebirth’ 


1-8 (E95-98; T196) The Buddha has asserted, as is well known, 
that the circuit of samsara is unlimited. This implies, according to 
Nagarjuna, that the temporal concepts "before", "after" and 
contemporaneous" have no definite (independent) meaning. It 
would lead to a long series of palpable absurdities if they had. 
Consequently there is no actual subject that experiences rebirth in 
the course or circuit of time. That goes for other dogmatic concepts, 
too; they cannot be pinned down as relatively before, after or 


114 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


contemporaneous. 1 


13S 


CHAPTER XII: Investigation of Frustration 


1-10 (E100-102; T197) Is not believing that there exists no actual 
subject, no person in the circuit of transmigration, to admit that 
frustration, viz., the five aggregates, etc. is a fact? No, answers 
Nagarjuna, for as the Buddha has declared, it cannot have arisen in 
any way, to wit, not out of its own aggregates, nor aggregates from 
elsewhere, nor from the same person, nor any other person. 
Obviously the notion of other-created presupposes that the self- 
created is established, which is not the case. Frustration is thus 
neither self-created nor created by others, so it cannot be created by 
both or be without a cause (implicit in verse 1). Everything else can 
be shown not to be able to arise, neither from itself, from another, 


from both or neither.” 


CHAPTER XIII: Investigation of Reality’ 


1-8 (E204-208; T198) The Buddha has stated that everything is 
false (unreal) because it is mosa (which can either mean elusive, 
thus the opponent, or delusive, thus Nagarjuna). This implies, so 
Nagarjuna says, that by the very fact of being false nothing can in 





1.The brevity of the chapter should not lead one to believe that its 
subject is unimportant. Nagarjuna, by accepting the idea that the 
circuit of existence is endless and therefore indeterminate, provides 
the best ontological foundation for his thesis that everything is 
correlative even to the extreme that samsara and nirvana cannot be 
separated (cf. XXV, 20, to be read in this light).. 


2.Nagarjuna has now proved that frustration or suffering, the basic 
empirical fact of existence, the presence of which is the driving force 
for all serious Buddhists, has not properly speaking come into actual 
existence. 


MADHYAMAKAKARIKAS 115 


fact be elusive. In other words, everything is empty, meaning that 
it cannot even be elusive. No, replies the opponent, the concept of 
emptiness is on the contrary synonymous with variability or change. 
Change is the true nature of things, and the true meaning of 
emptiness. No, replies Nagarjuna, if things, hypothetically speaking 
had a fixed nature they would by that token be unchangeable. But 
in fact there is nothing that can change, neither the same 
(unchanged) thing nor any other (which has already changed). Thus 
there is nothing nonempty (i.e., permanent and substantial), and 
one cannot talk of an alternative called empty. The teaching of the 
Buddha, when he talks about emptiness, points beyond any 
diametrical opposition. 


CHAPTER XIV: Investigation of Combination’” 


1-8 (E110-113; T198-199) Now what if someone claimed reality 
for empirical things by referring to the fact that they enter into 
combination? But the concept "combination" is not possible, says 
Nagarjuna. The premise for combination is that things are different 
and that they have independent existence. If they are absolutely 
different, these criteria cannot be fulfilled. The premise for 
combination is thereby annulled.” 


CHAPTER XV: Investigation of Being and Nonbeing™ 


1-9 (E114-119; T199-200) This chapter is not directed against a 





ne to Mahayana emptiness (an oid Canonical term) means 
nonorigination. According to other Buddhist schools it means 
impermanence. Cf. Ratnavali IV. 86. 


pet chapter should be read in the light of Chapter XXVI. 3 ff.: 
- a see sensation has been shown to be out of the question, the 
pe nae esire, appropriating and so on are prevented from further 

elopment. If with insight just one of the twelve members is 


brought to a st i i 
devices andstill, the remainder can be prevented from further 


116 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


particular concept in the opponent's dogmas, but against the 
fundamental idea that a given conceptual phenomenon exists 
substantially and immutably, and that it possesses being in and by 
itself. Nagarjuna replies that the concept of “own-being" excludes, 
of course, any suggestion of composition or dependence, ideally 
speaking. But obviously the existence of any such thing is logically 
and empirically impossible. The derived or secondary modes of 
being, other-existence, a particular existence, and absence are 
included in the refutation. The proponent of the substantiality of 
things simply fails to see the purpose of the Buddha's teaching. It 
should be obvious that the very concept of "substance" or fixed 
nature (and of course the complete absence of it) excludes the 
concept of alteration. The wise Buddhist will therefore distance 
himself from both dogmatic extremes, agreeing to the existence of 
anything permanent, and denying it, that is, believing in 
impermanence.! 


CHAPTER XVI: Investigation of Bondage and Liberation’? 


1-10 (E123-130; T200-201) Surely there is someone who is 
forced to go through samsdra? No, answers Nagarjuna. On the one 
hand the components cannot travel in samsara, whether they (or the 
"person") are thought of as eternally immutable or repeatedly 
momentary. On the other hand, the person cannot go into orbit, 
whether he is thought of as being one with the aggregates or quite 
different from them. And when there is no one in samsara, who 
will then go into nirvana? From another point of view the concepts 
of bondage and liberation are empty, because they are not 
compatible with the common understanding that things are 
momentary. Where and when should the binding take place? No 





1.This chapter is so basic that one wonders why it does not come 
much earlier. Nagarjuna does not dispute that there is empirical 

impermanence, but shows that, in reality, on a higher plane, as it 
were, nothing can be declared to be permanent, and nothing can 
be declared to be the opposite of permanent. Truth, or reality, is 
beyond contradictions, and can be realized as such by our faculty 
of buddhi or prajfid, i.e. in yoga. 


MADHYAMAKAKARIKAS 117 


one can be liberated from a bond that does not bind. The whole 
trouble comes from dissociating samsara and nirvana as being two 


independent opposites. 


CHAPTER XVII: Investigation of Karma and Its Fruits“° 

1-11 (E132-136; T201-202) The belief in the law of karma, that 
sound and healthy actions lead to happiness and that bad actions 
lead to the opposite, is the basis on which Buddhists conduct their 
daily lives. The immense practical significance of this is the reason 
why Nagarjuna makes such free use of common sense notions about 
karma's nature. Karma is will and action. Action is mental, bodily, 
or linguistic. These three each admit of seven divisions. From 
intention to the final ripening of the fruit of karma there runs a 
continuous series, designed to avoid the two extremes of 
permanence and destruction. 

12-20 (E136-139; T202-203) Another Buddhist school prefers, 
instead of the karma-continuum, the commercial analogy of a debt 
coming due for payment on a certain date. It can only be annulled 
by death or by the debtor (or creditor) becoming an arhat or 
Buddhist saint. 

21-33 (E139-143; 1203) Nagarjuna brushes aside all 
speculation.” It would be absurd if karma were substantial. Karma 
is directed by the defilements and therefore empty. The body it 
belongs to is therefore also empty. There is no agent, or creator of 
karma, consequently no karma and no fruit of karma. Agent and 
karma are illusory.> 


1.In this chapter Nagarjuna touches on a theme that will be treated 
again in Chapter XXV, that in reality there is no difference between 
samsara and nirvana. It goes without saying that he is well aware 
of the rhetorical force of his argument. 


2.His own opinion can be gleaned from 38.Ratnavali, etc. 


3.This chapter shows clearly that the law of karma is sovereign in 
Practice, and sovereign in definitive truth is the emptiness and 
unreality of karma, and everything else. More about karma in 
35.Siinyatasaptati 39-44, q.v. 


118 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
CHAPTER XVIII: Investigation of the Self and Factors’? 


1-12 (E145-161; T204-205) The idea of a personal substance has 
already been refuted in Chapters VIII-XII, and indirectly in II-VI, so 
Nagarjuna has only to recall that the self is neither one with the 
aggregates nor different from them. When there is no ego, no TS 
there is no "mine" (the aggregates). Appropriating (of the 
aggregates) is thus unsubstantiated. It comes from karma and the 
defilements, which themselves are due to the formation of a 
conceptually expanded world of manifoldness (prapafica). 
Liberation is obtained by the recognition of its emptiness, that is, by 
getting rid of ignorance. It is now clear that even the many-faceted 
teaching of the Buddhas only operates on the conventional plane 
without really referring to anything. They speak "psychological", not 
“ontological” truths. The fading out of contradictions must be 
experienced personally. According to their depth of insight there 


are three groups of Buddhists.! 


CHAPTER XIX: Investigation of the Periods of Time? 


1-3 (E163; T205) The opponent's idea is that time is real. It is 
what things, in various guises, traverse from the future, over the 
present, and down into the past. But, answers Nagarjuna, these 
periods must be present at least two by two (simultaneous) before 
they can be put into relationshp with each other. That is of course 
absurd and excluded. On the other hand, the three periods cannot 
be established without such a relation. Therefore they are all unreal. 

4 (E164; T205) All other corresponding sets of concepts can be 
dealt with in the same way. 

5-6 (E165-166; T205) Furthermore, time cannot be established, 
whether one takes it as momentaneous or static. Finally, one cannot 
establish the reality of time because things exist in it, i-e., by 


1.This verse has been misunderstood by all the commentators, 
ancient and modern. 


MADHYAMAKAKARIKAS 119 
inference. They do not, as has often been shown.! 


CHAPTER XxX: Investigation of Cause and Effect’ 


1-4 (E168-169; T205) The effect does not arise in the complex 
where it is supposed already to exist, nor in a complex where it is 
not found to exist. 

5-6 (E170; T206) The cause does not cease to act, either after it 
was supposed to be in operation, or before it has effects. 

7-9 (E170-171; T206) The effect does not exist simultaneously 
with, before, or after its sufficient condition. 

10-11 (E171-172; T206) An actual effect is not brought about by 
a cause that is absent, or present, whether it is supposed to be 
coupled with the effect or not. 

12-15 (E172-173; T206) A previous, contemporaneous, or future 
effect is not linked to a cause, whether it is past, future, or present. 
These three verses prove that effect and cause do not meet each 
other, or even if they did, it would be absurd if the cause should 
produce yet another effect. 

16 (E173; T206) The effect is not brought about by a cause that 
is devoid of effect, or by one that is not. 

17-18 (E174; T206) No effect can get established, neither the 
nonempty (substantial) nor the empty (totally absent). 

19-24 (E174-176; 206-207) Cause and effect are neither identical 
nor different. The cause does not produce existence or nonexistence, 
and consequently cannot be the cause of any effect. The effect 
cannot be brought about by its set of sufficient conditions, for it 
would then have to be self-productive, nor can it be brought about 
by any other set, which would be the wrong set. Therefore the 
sufficient condition cannot lead to any effect. 


1.This chapter, which comes rather abruptly as a new topic, must be 
taken together with what follows as Nagarjuna's final attack on the 
realistic categories of time and causality. Its arguments are 
recapitulated in 35.Siinyatasaptati 29. 


120 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
CHAPTER XxXI: Investigation of Integration and Disintegration’ 


1-5 (E178-179; T207) Disintegration can neither be simultaneous 
with, nor (quite) without integration, and vice versa. Each point is 
proved separately. 

6 (E180: T207) In general, two things that are neither together 
nor separate cannot be established. 

7-21 (E180-185; T207-209) Integration and disintegration do not 
apply to what has ceased. They can be associated with a specific 
thing, which is bound to keep on changing, so that they cannot be 
predicated of the same thing. They do not apply to what is empty 
(total absence) or nonempty (substantial). They are not identical or 
different. That they are perceived at all is because of pure 
ignorance. Being does not arise from nonbeing, etc. Any om f 
these ideas would imply the heresy of "something permanent". ' he 
opponent thinks, though, that the theory of a continuum or a series 
overcomes this fatal implication. No, answers Nagarjuna, whether 
the cause is assumed to come to an end or not, this would involve 
many absurdities. And when should this new existence (the 
aggregates) begin? Not after, during, and obviously not before the 
old existence. The conclusion is that a continuum cannot be 
established chronologically and its existence is therefore not proved. 


CHAPTER XXII: Investigation of the Buddha (tathdagata)'*° 


1-11 (E187-193; T209-210) Nagarjuna begins by examining the 
Buddha-figure. Buddha is neither identical with nor different from 
the aggregates, and so unreal. If the Buddha existed only on the 
basis of the aggregates or quite independently of them, that would 
be absurd. Both cases would imply an_ existence prior to 
appropriating. Therefore the Buddha cannot be established on the 
basis of grasping. Consequently there can be no appropriating 
associated with anyone at all. Both concepts are equally empty. All 
forms of expression can therefore only be suggestions, indications, 
nominal designations (prajfiapti). 

12-16 (E194-195; T210) This is the only way to avoid the 
many misconceptions about the Buddha, the world, and nirvana. 
The Buddha is in fact as empty and incomprehensible as the world 





MADHYAMAKAKARIKAS 121 


around us.! 


CHAPTER XXIII: Investigation of Misconceptions™® 


1 (E197; T210) In Buddhism a fundamental article of faith is that 
the defilements attachment, aversion and delusion, which cease only 
with nirvana, have their source in conceptualizings, which confuse 
good with bad, fair with foul, solid with hollow, and permanent 
with transitory. These are the four misconceptions. 

2-25 (E197-207; 1T210-212) But, Nagarjuna reminds his 
opponent, since the defilements arise dependently, they are nothing 
in their own right. Further, they cannot belong to the self or be in 
any way related to it. In addition to this, the grounds for the 
defilements, the four misconceptions, do not exist. This is because 
their objects are empty. Fair and foul (and the other three pairs) 
give no meaning when taken separately (and can consequently not 
establish each other). Can the defilements be established on such a 
basis? Again, there cannot be a correct or a mistaken conception, 
since there is in fact nothing permanent or impermanent to be 
mistaken about. Therefore all possible aspects of a given conception 
come to nothing. There is no subject which can possess the 
misconceptions. Whether anything permanent can be taken to exist 
or not, it cannot be the source for misconceptions. By thus 
eliminating misconceptions, ignorance, etc., are also abolished, even 
though, properly speaking, there is no question of abolishing any 





1.As Chapters III-V and VIII-XI were closely connected, so these 
Chapters XXIHI-XXV have the common theme that even Buddhism's 
most sacred concepts cannot escape the verdict that they are in the 
final analysis empty. By proving that the Buddha and appropriation 
cannot be used to establish each other, which means that they are 
both empty, Nagarjuna has removed any possible basis for the 


growth of misconceptions. The dogmas fade away, only suggestions 
Point the way. 


122 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
defilements, whether existing or nonexistent.’ 
CHAPTER XXIV: Investigation of the Noble Truths’*” 


1-40 (208-225; T212-215) First a colleague upbraids Nagarjuna 
for posing as an iconoclast or nihilist with his doctrine of total 
vacuity. This gives Nagarjuna the opportunity to define "emptiness", 
its significance and purpose. Difficult as it may be to take in, the 
proponent of emptiness is in the closest agreement with Buddhist 
practice. Conversely, to recognize anything nonempty (substantial) 
is a desecration of the Buddha's teaching about the correlativity 
(emptiness) of all things. All the accusations are turned back on the 
prosecutor. To admit the substantial existence of things is the same 
as denying the possibility of any change or development at all. It 
would be impossible to practise Buddhism. 


CHAPTER XXV: Investigation of Nirvana’ 


1 (£227; T215) The opponent still thinks that the concept of 
emptiness excludes the abolition of the defilements, that is to say, 
of achieving liberation first with, later without aggregates 
remaining. 

2-24 (E225-236; T215-217) On the contrary, replies Nagarjuna, 
it is only when emptiness is accepted that liberation is at all 
possible. Nirvana is free from all contradictions. Developed in more 
detail, nirvana can neither be a positive form of existence, i.e., a 
thing, nor a negative form of existence, ji.e., an absence. Nor can it 
be both, or neither. Thus it is impossible to assert anything about 
the Buddha in connection with nirvana. Nor is it possible to assert 
anything about the world. Since nirvana is undifferentiated there is 
no Buddha who has preached anything to anyone (cf. XVIII). 





1.It is easy to see why it is important to dispose of the four 
misconceptions. Then ignorance, the first constituent of existence, 
ceases, and with it all suffering. The theme is further developed in 
35.Siinyatasaptati 9-16 and 58-66, q.v. 





MADHYAMAKAKARIKAS 123 
CHAPTER XXVI: Investigation of the Twelve Members’? 


1-12 (E238-244; T217-218) Nagarjuna begins with a resumé of 
the emanation formula, which the Buddhist tradition takes as the 
expression of the Buddha's realization, in retrospect, of the genesis 
of frustration. It is a sort of "fall from grace." If the individual 
suffers from ignorance, and we all do, the personal karma begins to 
function. Our karma, or will, arouses consciousness. Step by step 
one awakens to "self-consciousness" and generates a personal 
existence. In so doing one becomes subject to the frustrations of the 
circuit of existence. This calamity can be treated only in one place, 
at the root, by the abolition of ignorance. The process operates all 


over the twelve members, i.e., ignorance is omnipresent. 


CHAPTER XXVII: Investigation of Dogmatic View! 


1-14 (E248-254; T218-219) Dogmatic views, sixteen in all, grow 
out of two (false) assumptions, that something (the self or the 
world) is either limited (impermanent) or infinite (permanent). The 
first to be rejected is that the self, in one of four ways, has always 
existed in the past. It cannot be asserted to be identical with 
appropriating or different from it, without incurring numerous 
absurdities. The four ways in which the self could hypothetically be 
thought to cease some time in the future are rejected analogously. 

15-28 (E254-259; T219-220) Second, the remaining eight views 
about the world. If the world were eternal everything would remain 
in its own fixed place. All actual change in connection with rebirth 
(god to man, for example) would be excluded. If the world were 
on the other hand limited, and in one way or another could come 
to a stop, that would also lead to absurdities. 


1.What is it that Nagarjuna wishes to convey in his reference to one 
of the most vital and obscure passages in the Canon? He wants to 
reassure his Buddhist readers or students of his orthodoxy. 
Suffering is due to all-pervasive ignorance. This is what Nagarjuna 

as striven, chapter by chapter, to overcome. Cf. 48.Catuhsataka 
XVL.1. The theme is further developed in 35.Sinyatasaptati. 


124 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


29-30 (E258; T220) The conclusion is that no one can establish 
any dogma.The premisses are false. We should merely praise the 
Buddha for having abolished all dogmas. 


34. NAGARJUNA, Vigrahavyavartani 
Summary by Kamaleshwar Bhattacharya 


This treatise consists of seventy verses in aryd meter, with a 
commentary in prose. Both the karikas and the vrtti are ascribed by 
tradition to Nagarjuna himself.5! It was written after the 
33.Mulamadhyamakakarikas. 

The text is extant in Sanskrit, Tibetan and Chinese, and has often 
been translated into modern Western languages.'*? Unfortunately, 
the Sanskrit material, discovered by Rahula Sankrtyayana and 
edited by him, is far from satisfactory; it is to the labors of E.H. 
Johnston and Armold Kunst? that we owe "the nearest 
approximation of Nagarjuna's original text." One can see, however, 
even from this imperfect material, that the prose of the 
commentary, like that of other commentaries of Nagarjuna,’ is 
modelled on that of Pataiijali's Mahabhdsya.'5 

The purpose of the text is to defend--in accordance with the 
prevailing rules of debate’**--Nagarjuna's thesis that all things are 
empty (Stinya) because devoid of an essential nature (nihsvabhava). 
It is divided into two parts, the first twenty verses setting forth the 
opponent's (or opponents’) objections, and the remainder 
Nagarjuna's own replies, a searching critique of the opponent's 
logical and epistemological assumptions, and a demonstration of the 
validity of the Madhyamaka theory and method. 

Opinions vary as to the identity of the opponent (or opponents): 
a Naiyayika and a Buddhist, according to Johnston and Kunst’®” and 
Tucci'*; a Naiyayika, who occasionally assumes the standpoint of 
the Buddhist realists'*; "an Abhidharmika following, of course, the 
rules. of debate prescribed in some Buddhist work on logic such as 

Upayahrdaya, etc."". At any rate, it was very much related to the 
Nydyasitras. 

"E" and "T" references are to pages of Kamaleshwar 

Bhattacharya's (47.13.10), separately paginated. 





VIGRAHAVYAVARTANI 125 
OBJECTIONS 


1-2 (E10-11; T5-7) If, as Nagarjuna says, "All things lack an 
essential nature" (or "Things have no essential nature" or "All things 
are empty"), saying so must be equally "lacking in essential nature" 
or “empty”. But then, how can an empty statement deny other 
empty things? If this denial is valid, saying so is not empty. But, in 
that case, not all things are empty, since the saying of it, which is 
included in "all things", is not empty. Nagarjuna's thesis (pratijfia) 
"All things are empty" is thus destroyed. There arises a discrepancy, 
namely that some things are empty while some others are not, and 
he should state the special reason for that difference. 

3 (E13; T7-8) It cannot be said that just as the sound "Do not 
make a sound" prevents another sound, even so the empty 
statement "All things are empty" prevents things from having an 
essential nature. For, in the example, a sound that exists prevents 
a (not-yet-existent) future sound; but it is not an existent statement 
that prevents things having an essential nature. 

4 (E13-14; T8-9) Nor can Nagarjuna contend that, according to 
the same line of argument, the opponent's denial of the statement 
denying the essential nature of all things is also impossible. For the 
latter does not hold that all things are empty; his statement, 
therefore, is not empty. 

5-6 (E14-15; T9-10) Nagarjuna cannot say that he denies all 
things after having apprehended them through any of the four 
instruments of knowledge, viz., perception, inference, comparison 
and verbal testimony. For these instruments of knowledge, being 
included in “all things", are equally empty. The objects to be 
apprehended through these means, as well as the person who 
apprehends them, are also empty. Thus there is no apprehension of 
things, and a denial of that which is not apprehended is a logical 
impossibility. 

7-8 (E15-17; T10-11) People conversant with the state of things 
hold that the essential nature of things is of different kinds: good 
things have a good intrinsic nature, bad things a bad intrinsic 





1-For a denial is not possible without a thing being denied. See 
11-12 below. 


126 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


nature, and so on. Therefore, the statement that all things lack an 
essential nature and hence are empty is not valid. (The vrtti gives 
a long list of dharmas. The "people conversant with the state of 
things" are clearly Buddhists, but the school they belonged to has 
not yet been identified.) 

9 (E17; T11) If things were to lack an essential nature, then even 
the term "lacking an essential nature" would not be possible; for this 
term must refer to something which is absent. 

10 (E18; T11-12) Nagarjuna cannot counter this objection by 
saying that there is an essential nature but that it does not belong 
to things. For there would be, then, an essential nature not 
belonging to things, and he should explain what it is the nature of! 

11-12 (E18-19; T12-13) It is something existing somewhere (or 
in some point of time) that is denied to be somewhere else (or in 
some other point of time), as, for instance, when one says: "There 
is no pot in the house." Likewise, Nagarjuna's negation "Things have 
no essential nature" is not the denial of an absolutely nonexistent 
essential nature. By the very fact that a denial is possible is 
established the essential nature of all things. A significant denial is 
of a real entity, not of a fictitious one. The denial of a nonentity is 
established even without words. What, then, does Nagarjuna deny 
by his statement, if the essential nature he denies does not exist at 
all? 

13-16 (E19-20; T13-14) Nagarjuna may say that, just as ignorant 
people wrongly perceive a mirage as water and that wrong 
perception is removed by some person who knows, saying "But that 
mirage is without water", even so his statement "All things lack an 
essential nature" is meant for removing people's wrong perception 
of an essential nature in things which are lacking an essential 
nature. But then, the aggregate of the following six things exists: 
a perception, the object to be perceived, the perceiver of the object, 
the denial of the wrong perception, the object denied, and the 
denier. And these things being established, the statement that all 
things are empty is not valid. Nor can Nagarjuna argue that there 
is no perception, no object to be perceived, and no perceiver, for in 
that case there would be no denial, no object denied, and no denier. 
And, if these absences do not exist, then not all things are denied, 
and some have an essential nature. 

17-19 (E21; T14-15) To establish his thesis that all things lack an 





VIGRAHAVYAVARTANI 127 


essential nature Nagarjuna needs a reason (hetu); but how can 
there be a reason for him, when everything lacks an essential nature 
and hence is empty? If he holds that the lack of essential nature is 
established without any reason, then the opponent's affirmation of 
the essential nature will be equally established without any reason. 
Nor can he hold that the things' lacking an essential nature is the 
existence of the reason; for there is nothing in the world which lacks 
an essential nature and is at the same time existent. 

20 (E22; T16) Finally, denial is not possible in any of the three 
times (before, during and after). The denial cannot come first and 
then the thing to be denied; for if the thing to be denied does not 
exist, what is it that is denied? Nor can the denial come after the 
thing to be denied; for if the thing to be denied is already 
established, what purpose is served by denying it? Nor even is it 
possible to hold that the denial and the thing denied are 
simultaneous; for then, the denial is not the cause of thing denied, 
nor is the thing denied the cause of the denial--just as of two horns 
simultaneously grown, the right horn is not the cause of the left, nor 
is the left horn the cause of the right. The essential nature of all 
things is, therefore, established. 


REPLIES 


21-24 responding to 1 (E2326; T19) The statement "All things 
are empty" is itself as empty as any other thing. Only the opponent 
has not understood the meaning of emptiness. It does not mean 
nonexistence, even from the empirical standpoint, but rather 
dependent origination. Those things which are dependently 
originated are not, indeed, endowed with an essential nature, 
because they are dependent on causes and conditions. But things 
thus dependently originated, and hence empty, perform actions 
nevertheless. An empty statement can, therefore, establish the lack 
of essential nature, i.e., emptiness, of things. And since the 
statement, being dependently originated, lacks an essential nature 
as do all other things, there is no abandonment of position on the 
part of Nagarjuna. There is no discrepancy, and hence there is no 
special reason to be stated. 

25-28 responding to 2-3 (E7-29; T20-22) The example "Do not 
make a sound" has been badly chosen vy the opponent. There a 


128 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sound is prevented by another sound, but that a statement lacks an 
essential nature does not prevent other things from lacking an 
intrinsic nature. If it did, from the cessation of things' lacking an 
essential nature it would be established that they are possessed of 
an essential nature! Or--Nagarjuna uses his favorite concept of 
sadhyasama--the example is acceptable to him; for all things, lacking 
an essential nature, are alike, and that sound, which is dependently 
originated, has no more existence by its own nature than any other 
thing--contrary to the opponent's assumption that "a sound that is 
existent prevents the other sound that will be". It proves, therefore, 
his thesis. However, adds Nagarjuna, the empty statement "All 
things are empty" has an empirical reality like all other things; and 
it is surely not possible to teach the absolute Truth (paramartha) 
without having recourse to the conventional truth (vyavahara) (here 
33.Madhyamakakarika is quoted). 

29 responding to 4 (E29; T23)'*! To the opponent's objection 
that the defect mentioned by him affects only Nagarjuna’s thesis, not 
his own, Nagarjuna's answer is simple: he has no thesis at all! 

30 (30-51 responding to 5-6) (E30; T24-25) To the objection that 
a denial of the essential nature of things that are not apprehended 
through any of the instruments of knowledge is a_ logical 
impossibility, Nagarjuna's answer is equally simple: he does not 
apprehend anything at all with the help of the four instruments of 
knowledge; he, therefore, neither affirms nor denies. 

31 (E31; T25) If such and such objects are established through 
the instruments of knowledge, how are the instruments themselves 
established? 

32 (E31-32; T25-26) If they are established through other 
instruments of knowledge then there is an infinite regress. 

33-39 (E32-35; T26-29)'* Nor can the opponent say that the 
instruments of knowledge are established without instruments of 
knowledge while objects known are established through the 
instruments; for, then, he abandons his position that all objects are 
established through instruments of knowledge. There is, further, a 
discrepancy, namely that some objects are established through 
instruments of knowledge while some others are not, and he should 
State the special reason for that. 

The opponent replies: The instruments of knowedge establish 
themselves as well as other things, just as fire illuminates itself as 


VIGRAHAVYAVARTANI 129 


well as other things.’ But Nagarjuna demonstrates at length (34- 
39) that the assumption that fire illuminates itself is wrong, by 
questioning how fire can get to darkness to illuminate it (i.e., cause 
it to be lighted up) without getting into contact with it somehow, 
which is absurd. 

40-41 (E35-36; T30) Furthermore, if the instruments of 
knowledge are self-established, then the instruments are established 
independently of their objects, for self-establishment does not 
require another thing. Thus the instruments of knowedge are 
instruments of nothing! 

42 (E36; T30-31) Nor can the instruments be established in 
relation to their objects; for that would be proving what is already 
proved (siddhasadhana). Something that is not established does not 
require something else to establish it! 

43 (E37; T31) Besides, if the instruments are established in 
relation to the objects, then the objects are not established in 
relation to the instruments. The object to be established (sadhya) 
does not, indeed, establish the instrument (sadhana) by which it is 
established. 

44 (E37; T31) And if the objects are established independently 
of the instruments, what is gained by establishing the instruments? 
That whose purpose they are supposedly needed to serve is already 
served! 

45 (E37-38; T31) Further, if the instruments are established in 
relation to the objects, then there is an interchange of instruments 
and objects; the instruments become objects because they are 
established (by the objects), and the objects become instruments 
because they establish (the instruments). 

46-48 (E38-39; T32-33) It may be thought that the instruments 
and the objects establish themselves mutually. But then, neither the 
objects nor the instruments are established. If the objects are 
established by the instruments, and if those instruments are to be 
established by those very objects, then the objects not having been 
established, the instruments are not established, because their 
established, i.e., the objects, are not established. Thus they cannot 
establish the objects. Similarly, if the instruments are established 
by the objects, and if those objects are to be established by those 
very instruments, then the instruments not having been established, 
the objects are not established. 


130 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


49-50 (E39-40; T33) It is as if the son were to be produced by 
the father, and that father were to be produced by that very son. 
Which of these is the father, and which other the son? 

51 (£40; T34) Nagarjuna concludes: "The instruments are not 
established by themselves or by one another or by other 
instruments. Nor are they established by the objects, or 
accidentally." 

52-56 in answer to 7-8 (E41-44; T35-38) The theory of the 
people conversant with the nature of things is thus refuted by 
Nagarjuna: Jf the so-called good essential nature, and so on, 
originate in dependence upon the cause-condition complex, they are 
only dependent natures, not essential natures of the good things, 
etc. The opponent may think that they do not originate dependently. 
But then, there is no practice of religious life (brahmacarya). By 
rejecting dependent origination, one rejects the vision of dependent 
origination. But if there is no vision of dependent origination there 
can be no vision of dharma, for the Buddha has said "He who sees 
dependent origination sees the dharma". And if one does not see 
the dharma, there can be no practice of religious life. Or, rejecting 
dependent origination, one rejects the four noble truths. There is no 
merit (dharma), no demerit (adharma), no worldly conventions; 
and all things, being endowed with an essential nature, become 
permanent. There follows the nonpractice of religious life, and the 
opponent contradicts his own tenet, namely that all conditioned 
things are impermanent.' 


1.This part of the text has to be read along with 33.Madhyamaka- 
karika XXIV, where Nagarjuna shows how his doctrine of emptiness, 
far from jeopardizing our activities, religious or not, in the world 
actually makes them possible. Emptiness is dependent origination. 
Now, if there is no dependent origination, there is no sorrow, no 
origination of sorrow, and for that reason, no cessation of sorrow 
and no way leading to the cessation of sorrow. Everything is 
immutable, free from the vicissitudes of the empirical world. Thus, 
if emptiness is denied, the four noble truths, which constitute the 
foundation of all religious practice of Buddhism, cannot be 
understood. The four noble truths, it may be recalled, have for 
Nagarjuna only an empirical validity. 


VIGRAHAVYAVARTANI 131 


57 in answer to 9 (E44-45; T38-40) To the objection that if 
things were to lack an essential nature then even the term "lacking 
an essential nature” would not be possible, Nagarjuna replies saying 
that there is no term which is really existent. Lacking an intrinsic 
nature, terms are as empty as all other things. 

58 (E45; T39) Furthermore, does the term "nonexistent", which 
the opponent considers to be existent, designate something existent 
or something nonexistent? Either alternative involves a self- 
contradiction. If the thing named is existent, then it has to be 
replied: the same thing cannot be both nonexistent and existent. If, 
on the other hand, the thing named is nonexistent, then it has to be 
replied: that which is nonexistent has no name. 

59 (E45-46; T39-40) The objection, after all, is quite irrelevant, 
since the Madhyamaka has established the emptiness of all things, 
including terms. 

60 in answer to 10 (E46; T40) Also irrelevant is the opponent's 
assumption that there is an essential nature which does not belong 
to the things (10 above); for Nagarjuna neither denies the essential 
nature of things (see 64 below) nor affirms the essential nature of 
an object apart from the object. 

61-63 in answer to 11 (E46-48; T40-41) As for the denial in 11 
above, Nagarjuna can easily use the opponent's own logic against 
him: If denial is of an existent and not of a nonexistent, and if the 
opponent denies emptiness, then this emptiness is established! Or, 
if the opponent denies emptiness and that emptiness does not exist, 
then he abandons his own thesis. It is, moreover, absurd to say that 
Nagarjuna denies anything since, all things being empty, there is for 
him neither a thing to be denied nor a denial. 

64 in answer to 12 (E48-49; T42) Concerning the opponent's 
objection that denial of a nonexistent is established even without 
words, what purpose is served by Nagarjuna's statement negating 
the essential nature of all things, if that essential nature does not 
exist at all? Nagarjuna observes that his statement does not create 
things' lacking essential nature, but merely makes known the 
absence of an essential nature where people wrongly see an 


132 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


essential nature.? 

65-67 in answer to 13-16 (E49-50; T43-44) The example of the 
mirage, cited by the opponent for refutation (13-16) above, is 
welcome to Nagarjuna. With this example he shows how all the six 
things mentioned by the opponent are dependently originated, and 
hence empty. 

68 in answer to 17-19 (E51; T45) With this Nagarjuna also 
answers the objection of the absence of a reason (17-19 above). His 
"reason" (hetu) for establishing the emptiness of all things is none 
other than the fact that they are dependently originated.” 

69 (E51-52; T45-46) To refute the objection that a denial is not 
possible in any of the three points of time (20 above), Nagarjuna 


1.Nagarjuna admits the cogency of the Naiyayika's arguments. In 
33.Madhyamakakarikas he often even bases his own argumentation 
on the latter's principle that a negation is not possible if the object 
to be negated is not real. Candrakirti makes it clear in his 
Prasannapada. Only, Nagarjuna does not negate anything, for there 
is nothing to be negated. The function of the statement "All things 
are devoid of an intrinsic nature" or "Things have no intrinsic 
nature" is to "make known" the absence of an intrinsic nature in all 
things, because they are naturally "devoid of an intrinsic nature" 
(svabhavasiinya), being "dependently originated". Nagarjuna's 
negation of the intrinsic nature is thus designed for dissipating the 
error of people who see an intrinsic nature in things where there is 
none. In other words, it has merely a therapeutic value--as 
Candrakirti makes clear in his comment on MK XV.11. It is possible 
that in 64 of the present text Nagarjuna drew his inspiration from 
Patafijali's Mahabhasya on Panini's Astddhyayi 11.2.6, where the 
grammarian discusses the question whether the negative particle na 
creates absence or simply makes an absence known. See also 
Vatsyayana's Bhdasya on Nydyasiitra 1.1.11 and Uddyotakara's 
Varttika thereon. 


2.As a prdsangika, Nagarjuna shows no predilection for 
"independent inference" (svatantrikanumana). Nevertheless, he 
cannot be accused of not vindicating his position from the 
standpoint of formal logic. 


VIGRAHAVYAVARTANI 133 


once more appeals to his concept of sadhyasama (cf. 28 above). The 
three times are as empty as all other things. The up-holders of the 
doctrine of emptiness can therefore deny in all the three times, 
whereas the Naiyayika cannot. Of course, Nagarjuna also points out 
that, in accordance with the latter's own doctrine, a denial of the 
Madhyamika's denial is not possible either. 

70 (E52-53; 147-48) Nagarjuna concludes his work by 
vindicating empirical reality from the standpoint of the doctrine of 
emptiness, i.e. dependent origination (cf. 52-56 above), and pays 
homage to the "incomparable Buddha", who taught emptiness, 
dependent origination and the middle way as equivalent. 


35. NAGARJUNA, Siinyatdsaptati 
Summarized by Peter Della Santina 


Nagarjuna's Siinyatdsaptati comprises one of the important works 
of the Madhyamaka system. Along with the 
33.Mulamadhyamakakarikas, 37.Yuktisastika and others, it is one of 
the six works of Nagarjuna the study of which is required by the 
Tibetan Buddhist tradition for a proper comprehension of the 
Madhyamaka philosophy which is an indispensable part of the 
Mahayana. As its name indicates, the Siinyatdsaptati is devoted to 
an exposition of emptiness by means of the refutation of the 
independent reality of factors. Like the Mulamadhyamakakarikas, 
the Stinyatdsaptati treats a number of concepts from the 
Madhyamaka standpoint. However, because of its brevity, consisting 
of only seventy stanzas along with their autocommentary, the ideas 
presented in the Siinyatdsaptati are more easily assimilated than 
those found in the Mulamadhyamakakarikas. 

_ The method of argument employed by Nagarjuna in the 
Sunyatdsaptati is the same as is to be found in the 
Milamadhyamakakarikas and other fundamental works of the 
Madhyamaka school. It may briefly be described as a method of 
argument which employs the tenets of the opponent of the system 
in order to demonstrate the ultimate inconsistency of the doctrines 
advocated by the opponent. Thus, on the basis of facts the reality 
of which is accepted by the opponent, Nagarjuna establishes the 
impossibility and relativity of the concepts which make up his 


134 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


universe of discourse, thereby revealing the nature of the ultimately 
real which is empty and devoid of conceptualisation. 

In the Millamadhyamakakarikas, Sinyatasaptati and other works, 
Nagarjuna was principally concerned to establish the Madhyamaka 
philosophy within the Buddhist fold. It was left to his disciples like 
Aryadeva and others to show that the Madhyamaka critique was 
equally applicable to non-Buddhist doctrines. Therefore, with few if 
any exceptions, it is the doctrines advocated by Abhidharmika 
schools of Buddhism, or in other words, the Buddhist realists, that 
are refuted in the Sinyatdsaptati. The reality of the factors 
(dharma), aggregates (skandha), senses (@yatana) as well as that of 
causality, karma and impermanence is systematically refuted. Yet, 
it must not be thought that Nagarjuna set forth a doctrine 
fundamentally at variance with the teaching of the Buddha. On the 
contrary, it is argued that the philosophy of the Madhyamaka in fact 
represents a more faithful interpretation of the essential teaching of 
the Buddha Sakyamuni. The key to this understanding lies in the 
doctrine of interdependent origination which has remained the 
central tenet of Buddhist thought throughout centuries of 
interpretation and reinterpretation. Nagarjuna's philosophy 
essentially springs from a reinterpretation of the meaning of 
dependent origination. It may be said that the very 
interdependently originated nature of phenomena constitutes their 
ultimate lack of independent existence and therefore their 
emptiness. Thus, interdependent origination and emptiness, far 
from being contradictory, are in reality identical in import. 

The work is available only in Tibetan (Toh. 3827, 3831, 3867) in 
translations made in the ninth through the eleventh century. 
However, Bhavya, Candrakirti and other later Madhyamaka writers 
take Nagarjuna's authorship for granted, and karikds are quoted, 
though without identification, in the 133.Akutobhaya and later 
texts. The present summary is based on an English translation by L. 
Jamspal and Peter della Santina made for the Sakya Institute of 
Tibetan Philosophy in Missouri in 1978, as well as a translation of 
the karikas by Christian Lindtner (Nagarjuniana, pp. 35-69). We 
have also consulted the translation by Tola and Dragonetti, Journal 
of Indian Philosophy 15, 1987, pp. 1-55 (who question the 
ascription of the Svavrtti to this Nagarjuna). "E" and "T" references 
are to Tola and Dragonetti just referred to. 


! 





SUNYATASAPTATI 135 


1 (£10; T24) Existence and nonexistence, beginning and end, 
better and worse are not actual (tattva), but only practical ways of 
speaking (lokavyavahara). 

2 (E11; T24) Everything--self, not-self, both self and not-self-- 
being nameable things, are, like nirvana, devoid of essential nature. 

3 (E11; T24) Since there is no essential nature in things’ causes 
and conditions, whether taken separately or collectively, everything 
is empty. 

4 (E11; T24-25) What exists doesn't begin since it already exists. 
What doesn't exist doesn't begin since it doesn't exist. To both exist 
and not to exist is contradictory. Since nothing begins, there is no 
duration and no destruction. 

Objection: The beginning, duration and end of things is known 
to us, as well as the beginning of beginning, duration of duration 
and end of end. 

5 (E11; T25) Answer: What has already been born cannot begin, 
what is unborn cannot be born. What is being born cannot rightly 
be called a "beginning", since it is partly born and partly unborn. 
Moreover, there is no beginning because a cause is not justified. 
Why? Because 

6 (E11; T25) If the effect exists a "cause" that possesses it as 
effect is not its cause. If the effect is nonexistent, its "cause" is no 
cause. If the effect neither exists nor doesn't exist it is contradictory. 
A cause cannot be consistently assigned to any of the three times. 

Objection: Things are not empty, for their number is justified. 
The numbers one (eka), two and many (aneka) exist, but number 
is justified only if things exist. Therefore, things are not empty. 

7 (E12; T25) Answer: Without one, many does not occur; 
without many one does not occur; therefore, dependently originated 
entities are signless. 

Objection: Dependent origination, involving frustration, has been 
set forth in the scriptures. It has also been demonstrated by the 
masters as involving either one awareness or several awarenesses. 
So, all things are empty. 

8 (E12; T25-26) The twelve members (of the chain of dependent 
origination) cannot arise, since they cannot constitute a single 
awareness or a series of awarenesses. If they arise in a single 
awareness the effect would originate simultaneously with its cause, 
while if they occur in a series of awarenesses the preceding 


136 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


members, having been destroyed, cannot be the cause of the 
succeeding ones. So dependent origination cannot arise. 

Dependent origination is wrongly thought to arise from 
ignorance, and ignorance in turn from erroneous views. These 
erroneous views are also in their own nature empty. 

9 (E12; T26) Nothing is permanent, nothing impermanent; 
nothing is selfless, nothing has a self; nothing is pure, nothing 
impure; nothing satisfying, nothing frustrating. So there can be no 
erroneous views. 

10 (E12; T26) Without erroneous views there is no ignorance, 
and without ignorance conditioning factors don't originate, nor do 
any of the rest of the members of the chain of dependent 
origination. 

11 (£12; T26) Without conditioning factors ignorance does not 
arise, and without ignorance the conditioning factors don't arise. 
Since they also are mutually caused, they are not established as 
having an essential nature. 

12 (E12-13; T26) How can what is not established as having an 
essential nature produce other things? Conditions established by 
others cannot cause the origination of others. 

13 (E13; T26) The father is not his son nor is the son his father, 
nor can they exist without each other. Likewise for the twelve 
members (of the chain of dependent origination). 

14. (E13; T26-27) Just as the satisfaction or frustration 
experienced in a dream do not have an actual thing as content, 
likewise neither do what originates dependendy nor that upon 
which it depends exist. 

15 (E13; T27) Objection: If things are without an essential nature 
they can't be proved to be of differing natures from one another. 

16 (E13; T27) Answer: If an essential nature for things were 
established the origination of things cannot be dependent on 
anything else. If something essentially exists it can't cease to exist, 
since what is essential to a thing cannot disappear. 

Objection: But whether things have an intrinsic nature, a 
dependent nature, or a lack of nature those natures are not 
nonexistent, and so things are not empty. 

17 (E13; T27) Answer: Those--intrinsic nature, dependent nature, 
lack of nature--are perverted views, and cannot abide in what 
doesn't exist at all. 





wees 


SUNYATASAPTATI 137 


18 (E14; T27) Objection: If things are empty they can't begin or 
end. So how can an empty thing begin or end? 

19 (E14; T27-28) Answer: An existent and an absence cannot 
exist simultaneously. Without an absence there is no being. An 
entity will always be something and not be something else. Without 
nonbeing there is no being. 

A presence and an absence cannot exist at one time in the same 
place. Here someone says "only positive entities exist". The text 
answers "Without an absence there is no being", because no being 
lacks impermanence, so every being is a presence (of something) 
and an absence (of something else), i.e., impermanent. 

Here someone may object "although a thing is always bound up 
with impermanence, still, at the time of origination and duration, 
impermanence is latent, while at the time of destruction, 
impermanence destroys the thing." The text answers "Without 
nonbeing there is no being", which is to say that a thing is not 
existent without an absence, since without destruction nothing can 
be impermanent. So (again) everything is a presence (of something) 
and an absence (of something else). 

20 (E14; T28) Without existence there is no absence. An existent 
can come from neither itself nor from another. Thus there are no 
existents, and therefore no absences either. 

21 (E14; T28) If there are only positive things that is eternalism; 
if there are only absences that is nihilism. If a positive entity exists 
these two views follow. Therefore no positive being should be 
accepted. 

22 (E14; T28) Objection: There is a series of causes and effects, 
so neither (eternalism nor nihilism) apply. When a thing causes it 
ceases to exist. 

Answer: As was shown, this is not acceptable, and also, the 
causal sequence will be interrupted. 

A presence and an absence cannot be identical. That is why the 
sequence you propose cannot be accepted. 

23 (E14-15; T28) Objection: The Buddha's teaching of the path 
to liberation involves origination and destruction, not emptiness. 

Answer: These two (origination and destruction) are 
contradictory to each other. 

24 (E15; T28) Objection: If neither origination nor destruction 
exist, the cessation of what constitutes liberation? 


138 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer: Isn't liberation precisely that which neither originates 
nor ceases? 

25 (E15; T29) If liberation were destruction that would be 
nihilism; if not, that would be eternalism. So, liberation is neither 
a positive entity nor an absence. It neither originates nor ceases. 

26 (E15; T29) If some cessation could persist it would be devoid 
of any positive entity. But it can't occur without a positive entity 
occurring, and without an absence cessation cannot occur. 

27 (E15; T29) A marked thing is so in virtue of a characteristic 
mark other than that marked thing. It is not proved by itself, nor 
can mark and marked prove each other, since what is not proved 
cannot prove. 

28 (E15; T29) In this way cause and effect, feeling and feeler, 
seer and seen, etc. are all explained. 

29 (E16; T29) The three times do not exist and are merely 
conceptual constructions, since they are not fixed (asthita), are 
reciprocally established, are changing, are not established 
independently, and because a positive being doesn't exist. 

Why is time not established? Because it is not fixed, and what is 
not fixed cannot be apprehended, since to apprehend is to classify 
and one cannot classify what is not fixed. So time does not exist. 
Furthermore, the three times each depend on the others for their 
proof. Also, the three times change--what is present is past, and 
what is future is present. Finally, since positive entities don't exist 
(as shown before) time is not established as a positive entity. 

Objection: It was taught that all conditioned factors have three 
marks--origination, duration and destruction. Opposed to these are 
the unconditioned factors. So conditioned and unconditioned factors 
exist. 

30 (E16; T30) Answer: Those three marks of origination, 
duration and destruction don't exist, so no factor, conditioned or 
unconditioned, exists. 

Even if conditioned factors are accepted, still they should be 
deemed nonexistent since, when analyzed, they are not justified. 
Why? 

31 (E16; T30) The undestroyed is not destroyed, nor is the 
destroyed; the enduring does not endure, nor does the nonenduring 
endure; the originated does not originate, nor does the 
nonoriginated. 





SUNYATASAPTATI 139 


32 (E16; T30) Conditioned factors and unconditioned factors are 
neither many nor one, neither existent nor nonexistent, nor both 
existent and nonexistent. Within this perimeter, all possibilities are 
included. 

33 (E16; T30) Objection: The Buddha proclaimed the enduring 
of karma, proclaimed karma and its fruit, proclaimed that the 
sentient being is the doer of karma and that karma is not lost. 

34 (E16-17; T30-31) Answer: It has been demonstrated that 
karma has no essential nature. Karma does not originate, hence it 
cannot be destroyed. Egoism (ahamkdra) arises from karma. And 
that appropriating which produces karma originates from conceptual 
construction. 

35 (E17; T31) If karma had an essential nature, then the body 
originated from it would be permanent; it would not result in 
frustration. Therefore, karma would be substantial. 

36 (E17; T31) Karma is not born of conditions, nor does it arise 
without conditions, for conditions are like an illusion, a fairy city or 
a mirage. 

37 (E17; T31) Karma has defilements as its cause; conditioning 
factors are substantiated by karma and defilements. The body has 
karma as its cause; so all three are essentially empty. 

38 (E17; T31) Without karma there is no agent; without these 
two, nothing results from action, and without any of them there is 
no experiencer. Hence all are empty. 

39 (E17; T31) If one understands that karma is empty, because 
of that insight karma will not originate. Without karma, that which 
originated from karma will not arise. 

40 (E18; T31-32) Where the Lord Tathagata creates a magical 
being, and that magical being creates another, 

41 (E18; T32) there, the magical being created by the Lord and 
the second magical being are both empty, mere names, conceptual 
constructions. 

42 (E18; T32) Similarly, the agent is like the magical being; 
karma is like what is created by the magical being. They are 
essentially empty, conceptual constructions. 

43 (E18; T32) If karma had an essential nature, there would be 
no nirvana. If karma did not exist, there would be no satisfying or 
frustrating results originated from karma. 

Question: Since it is extensively proclaimed in the canonical 


140 


discourses that karma exists, how can it be called nonexistent? 

44 (E18; T32) What Buddhas say exists exists, what they don't 
say exists also exists, and what both exists and doesn't exist exists. 
It is not easy to understand. 

45 (E18-19; T32) If matter is itself derived it is not derived from 
matter. It can't be derived from itself, nor from anything else. So it 
doesn't exist. 

46 (E19; T33) The four great elements are not existent in any 
one of them, nor is one existent in all four. So how can matter be 
established as depending on the four nonexistent great elements as 
its cause? 

47 (E19; T33) Since subtle matter is never apprehended, gross 
matter, it seems, doesn't exist. If you say there is a reason for 
thinking it does exist, that reason itself doesn't exist, since it too is 
born from causes and conditions. And to suppose that matter exists 
without any reason for thinking so is contrary to reason. 

48 (E19; T33) If awareness could appropriate matter it could 
appropriate its own essential nature. How could an awareness 
which doesn't essentially exist, being born from conditions, actually 
understand the nonexistence of matter? 

49 (E19; T33) Since a moment of awareness can't apprehend the 
matter born at that very moment, how can it comprehend past and 
future matter? 

50 (E19; T33) Since color and shape never exist separately, they 
cannot be conceived to be separate. Isn't matter generally 
understood as single? 

51 (E20; T33-34) Visual awareness is not inside the eye; it is not 
inside matter; nor is it somewhere in between. That conceptual 
construction is dependent on the eye and matter is erroneous. 

52 (E20; T34) If the eye does not see itself, how can it see 
matter? Therefore, the eye and matter are insubstantial. Likewise for 
the remaining (sense-)bases. 

53 (E20; T34) The eye is empty of its own self; it is empty of any 
other's self. Matter is similarly empty. The remaining (sense-)bases 
are similar to it. 

Moreover, matter is empty because it is dependently originated. 
In this case, what is established from the great elements of matter 
having functioned as a cause is originated dependently. Hence, what 
is originated dependently is not originated in its own actuality. 





SUNYATASAPTATI 141 


Thus, matter is empty of its own self. And since matter is the object 
to the eye and its awareness which are the subject, and since the 
subject is not that subject's object, matter is also empty of another's 
self. 

Alternatively, awareness is internal, while matter is external. So 
matter is again empty of another's self. 

Question: From what is visual awareness dependently originated, 
and how is it dependently originated? 

Answer: Awareness is established dependent upon the object 
comprehended, etc. What is dependently originated is not 
established in its own self. Thus that awareness is empty. 
Therefore, to say that awareness apprehends objects is not 
appropriate. 

54 (E20; T34) When one sense(-organ) is in contact (with an 
object), at that time the other senses are empty (of contact). The 
empty does not depend upon the nonempty; the nonempty also does 
not depend on the empty. 

55 (E20; T34) The three (organ, object and awareness), being 
without an independent nature, cannot come into contact. Since 
there is no contact of this sort feelings do not exist. 

56 (E20-21; T34) Awareness arises dependent on inner and outer 
senses. So awareness is empty, like a mirage or a magical creation. 

57 (E21; T35) Since awareness arises only as dependent on an 
object it doesn't exist. Since there is no awareness and no content 
of awareness, there is no cognizer. 

58 (E21; T35) "All things are noneternal" really indicates that 
neither eternality nor noneternal things ever exist. If entities existed, 
they would be either eternal or not eternal, but how can anything 
exist? 

59 (E21; T35) Desire, aversion and delusion arise from perverted 
views about what is clean or foul. Therefore, those three are 
essentially nonexistent. 

60 (E21; T35) Since one may desire, hate or be deluded by the 
same thing, these passions are produced by conceptual 
constructions, which don't really exist. 

61 (E21; T35) What is constructed doesn't exist. Without a 
constructed object how can construction itself exist? Therefore, since 
they are originated from conditions, constructed objects as well as 
constructions are empty. 


142 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


62 (E22; T36) When the truth is understood, there is no 
ignorance deriving from the four perverted views. Since (then) 
ignorance is nonexistent, conditioning factors do not arise, and the 
remaining elements of ignorance don't arise either. 

63 (E22; T36) What originates dependent upon something 
originates from that. Without that it does not originate. Entities and 
nonentities, as well as conditioned elements and unconditioned 
ones, are calm and extinguished. 

64 (E22; T36) That entities originated from causes and 
conditions are real is called ignorance by the Buddha. From that, 
the twelve members of (the chain of) dependent origination arise. 

65 (E22; T36) When one understands that things are empty one 
is not deluded. Just that is the cessation of ignorance. Thereupon 
the twelve members (of the chain of dependent origination) cease. 

66 (E22; T36) Conditioning factors are like the city of the 
Gandharvas, maya, a mirage, nets of hair, foam, bubbles, magical 
fire, dreams and the whirling firebrand. 

67 (E23; T37) No entity whatsoever is existent in its essential 
nature, nor does any absence exist either. Entities and absences, 
originating from causes and conditions, are empty. 

68 (E23; T37) Since all entities are empty of essential nature, the 
dependent origination of entities is particularly demonstrated by the 
incomparable Tathagata. 

69 (E23; T37) The highest truth is no other than this emptiness. 
The blessed Buddha, the Lord, relying upon worldly convention, 
imagined all possibilities. 

70 (E23; T37) Worldly dharma is not destroyed. In reality no 
norms are taught. It is by not comprehending the proclamation of 
the Tathagata that one becomes afraid of the spotless teaching. 

71 (E23; T37) The worldly principle that the arising of a thing is 
dependent on another is not denied. What is dependently 
originated is lacking intrinsic nature: how can it be existent? This is 
ultimate certitude. 

72 (E23; T37-38) One who diligently seeks the truth, who 
considers each aspect logically and relies on dharma, abandons 
positive being and absences and attains peace. 

73 (E24; T38) Having comprehended phenomenal conditionality, 
the net of false views is swept aside. Consequently, abandoning 
attachment, delusion and anger, without stain, one surely reaches 


SUNYATASAPTATI 143 


liberation. 


36. NAGARJUNA, Vaidalyaprakarana 
Summary by Christian Lindmer 


7 This work, extant in Tibetan only, consists of seventy-four brief 
sutras. With Nagarjuna's own commentary, together they form a 
prakarana. Unlike the 34.Vigrahavyavartant, to which it forms a 
pendant, this work is solely addressed to non-Buddhist logicians, 
more specifically, to the adherents of "the subtle Nyaya". This fact 
accounts for its siitra style, unusual with Buddhists (cf. 
50.Aksarasataka, against Samkhya and Vaisesika), as well as the 
unusual polemical fervor compared to the author's other works. The 
title of the work, "The Pulverization", alludes to the epithet "subtle" 
used in those days for the followers of Aksapada. Nagarjuna's work 
is written in order to grind their sixteen categories to fine little 
pieces;Sanskrit siiksma meaning subtle as well as fine. 

The edition of the Nydyasiitra known to Nagarjuna was definitely 
an earlier recension than our textus receptus. For details see 
Lindner, Nagarjuniana, pp. 87-93. 

; The work is organized so as to deal successively with each of the 
sixteen categories we find set forth in Nyayasiitra 1.1. Section 
headings correspond to those categories. 


1. Instrument and Object of Knowledge 


1-19. Nagarjuna's initial hypothesis is that the instrument of 
oe and the object known are indissolubly joined and 
erefore they cannot be established independently. 

The opponent allows that they are correlates, but thinks all the 
same that they can establish each other. Therefore Nagarjuna must 
refute the three ways in which this could, hypothetically, come 
about. Neither what exists, what does not exist, nor what exists and 
does not exist can enter into relation. This argument is of general 


application, including, of course, instru j 
ivi ; ment and object of 


144 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


If the objector insists that everything is established by instruments 
of knowledge, then this must include the instruments as well, which 
leads to infinite regress. Alternatively, the instruments of knowledge 
may be denied altogether, but this means giving up the hypothesis. 

But the objector persists in maintaining that instruments of 
knowledge are self-established because they "illuminate" themselves, 
like a lamp. Nagarjuna rejoins that this example is most unhappy, 
since a lamp cannot possibly illuminate anything, itself or anything 
else, whether it is in contact with its object or not. Besides, the 
relationship between instrument and object cannot be established in 
any of the three periods of time. 

The objector's reply, that the same, then, goes for Nagarjuna's 
denial, makes Nagarjuna triumph: If the objector thinks that 
Nagarjuna then instead maintains his denial, and the objector 
accepts this, he by that very fact accepts that the instrument and 
object must be denied; then, in a flash, all disputes are settled. But 
actually Nagarjuna neither accepts a denial nor something to be 
denied, he merely tries to indicate the absence of essential being. 

The objector still insists that the pram4Gnas exist because they 
provide correct understanding, and when Nagarjuna asks how one 
can be sure that an object exists independently of awareness, the 
objector claims that the awareness of a jar is the instrument, 
whereas the jar as such is the object. 

But, replies Nagarjuna, the objector recognizes that awareness 
arises from the contact of organ and object of sense, and since the 
jar must be a specific condition of awareness beforehand, awareness 
cannot be the instrument of it, and the jar is not the object. 

Besides, the objector himself categorizes awareness as an 
instrument, not as an object of knowledge. 


3-4. Doubt and Purpose 


20-23. Could Nagarjuna's treatment of instrument and object of 
knowledge not give rise to some doubt? No, there is nothing to be 
in doubt about, neither that which is comprehended, which exists, 
nor that which is not comprehended, which doesn't exist. 

Even if the objector finds lack of decisive characteristic in 
something to be the cause of doubt about it, the same argument 
applies here. 





VAIDALYAPRAKARANA 145 


But may one not be uncertain about a purpose? No, for the 
objector himself maintains that the object one is concerned about is 
the object he purposefully seeks, and the object that one is 
concerned about can only either exist or not exist, hence not be an 
object of doubt. : 


5. Example 


24-30. If the objector objects that there are examples of things 
that serve a purpose, like sand, Nagarjuna's refutation remains the 
same as above. Besides, there is no example because there is no 
beginning and no middle.’ Still the objector maintains the 
possibility of an example that may be either of the same or of a 
different kind--but Nagarjuna rejoins that neither that which is of 
the same kind as that it is supposed to examplify (e.g., fire of fire) 
nor that which is of another kind--whether it be so entirely or only 
to some extent--can serve as an example. 


6. Tenets 


31. When Nagarjuna claims that everything is unestablished 
mustn't he himself accept something as established, namely his own 
tenets? No, not at all, for without something established at the 
beginning, how can he accept something established at the end? 


7. Members of an Inference 


i a the five members of an inference are refuted in 
oe - ince they are not subject to a whole or parts of an 
se ton — group, and since they would be identical if they were 
= bse _ ieee if they were different there would be six 

use they are unestablished in any of the th imes-- 
therefore the members are not established. A RRS a 


Objection: The five members can operate together, like cotton 





ao understand this argument one must recall that Sanskrit 
rstanta" ("example") = drsta + anta, lit. "seen" + "end". So: no 
end, therefore no beginning and no middle. 


146 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


threads. A single thread accomplishes nothing, but many combined 
into one can tether an elephant. 

Answer: No, the individual threads are no better off. What 
cannot be achieved by a single son of a barren woman cannot be 
achieved by any number of them, and even if it be granted that they 
might do so by working simultaneously, the five members never 
occur simultaneously as a single whole. Besides, before the 
members can prove anything they themselves must be proved, 
namely by other members, and so on ad infinitum. 

Next, the five members are refuted one by one. A hypothesis is 
impossible since it is neither identical with nor different from its 
reason. A reason is impossible since it either must have another 
reason and so forth ad infinitum, or else a reason is present without 
a reason. But that is absurd and would lead to a total confusion. 
So since there is no hypothesis, no reason, and no example, the 
remaining two members of an inference, application and conclusion, 
simply lapse. Even if a hypothesis could be established without a 
reason, that would mean that the other three members were 
established without a reason. 

Again, if proof were due to a reason, then an example would be 
quite superfluous, and if not, then the reason would be otiose, but 
in that case example, etc., would be superfluous. 

The objector's specific hypothesis, that the self is eternal because 
it is without body, like space, is refuted. Further, since hypothesis 
and reason can only be denominated successively, a hypothesis 
cannot be a hypothesis to its (coexisting) reason, and vice versa. 

Objection: But when Nagarjuna denies all the members it would 
seem that he implicitly accepts a hypothesis, and, eo ipso, the four 
remaining members of inference. Answer: No, since there is no 
hypothesis (pratijfid), for prati and jfid must be enunciated 
separately one after the other. 


8. Tarka 
49. This category cannot be sanctioned either, since neither the 


artha that is already known nor the artha that is unknown can be 
an object of deliberation (tarka). So what remains to be deliberated? 


VAIDALYAPRAKARANA 147 
9. Ascertainment 


50. This is also impossible since substance, being, one, etc., 
which could serve to fix something definitely, are neither identical 
nor different nor both. (Without any means of ascertainment, there 
is nothing to ascertain, and, therefore, no ascertainment.) 


10. Discussion 


51-55. Objection: Nagarjuna must, obviously, accept the category 
of discussion (since we're having one now)! 

Answer: No, because talk (abhidhana) and the issue under 
debate (abhidheya) cannot be established, as they are neither single 
nor many. Nor can they alternatively be connected by definite 
conventional relations of names to things, which would, incidentally, 
imply that the things/meaning/object (artha) of the objector's 
sixteen categories should not be taken more seriously than the 
significance of names such as Devadatta or Indragupta, because the 
very fact that any word can function as a synonym or homonym of 
well-nigh anything excludes any definite and _ indissoluble 
relationship between names and things/meanings. Finally, they 
on belong to one another. Thus the preconditions of debate are 
absent. 


11-12. Sophistry and Cavil 


56. These two categories are refuted in the same way as debate 
was. 


13. Fallacies of the Reason 


57-66. Objection: Everything that you say is fallacious reasoning 
(hetvabhdsa) and incapable of refuting anything! 

Answer: No. Neither by being the same kind as nor by being of 
a different kind from the actual h can a fallacious h come into 
question. If a fallacious h is qualified as an h that is deviating, this 
is wrong, since neither the h which is valid (sadhyasadhaka) nor the 
one which is not can be classified as deviating. 

The objector. insists that an h may be deviating in the sense of 


148 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


equivocal (anaikantika). Thus immateriality can serve as an h, now 
for akaga, now for karma. No, says Nagarjuna, these are two 
different types of immateriality, as one may prove the permanence 
of one thing, the impermanence of another. Consequently the h 
adduced during proof and refutation is not itself deviating. Again, 
there can be no h which is deviating in relation to the s, for as 
things occur instantaneously, proof and refutation are not 
concurrent with what has to be proved or refuted. 

The objector now suggests that every h discarded by Nagarjuna 
is, if not deviating, at least contradictory (viruddha). No, replies 
Nagarjuna, for how can two utterances be conflicting since it is 
obvious that when the first statement is being formulated, the 
second has not yet occurred. They can only be conflicting if they are 
simultaneous. And yet simultaneous statements cannot be 
conflicting either, since it is impossible for proponent and antagonist 
to put forward charge and rebuttal at the same time. 

The objector then proposes that an h which is "mistimed" 
(kaldtita) does in fact constitute a fallacy. Nagarjuna disagrees, for 
a previous basis for something present cannot, by reason of being 
past, be a basis for anything present which does not occur yet. One 
had better not play fast and loose with past, present and future for 
all normal intercourse will then be suspended. Besides, since what 
is previous is past and gone, an h localized there cannot form the 
basis for anything in the present time. 


14. Quibble 
67. Objection: All Nagarjuna’s statements are simply conscious 


distortions of the meanings of my words. 
Nagarjuna: O no, then any attempt at critical aloofness or 


disagreement would be distortion or quibble. 


15. Futile Rejoinder 


68. The concept of jati, futile rejoinder, is impossible. Without 
what is rejoined to, not rejoined to, or to be rejoined to, futile 





VAIDALYAPRAKARANA 149 
rejoinder is precluded.’ 
16. Ways of Losing an Argument 


68-71. Nagarjuna is now blamed for having incriminated himself 
on account of repetition, one of the ways of losing an argument. 
But Nagarjuna does not plead guilty, as what is supposed to have 
been repeated is neither identical with nor different from what it 
repeats. In any case, a way of losing an argument does not exist 
either when the charge has been made or when it has not yet been 
made. As for the third possibility, one is not convicted on any count 
as long as one is still being prosecuted, any more than one is trussed 
before the final knot is tied. 


Conclusion 


72-73. Now that the sixteen topics or "categories" have been 
made the objects of denial, denial is also rendered impossible. 
Hence there is no talk and nothing to talk about, and therefore one 
cannot distinguish the Buddhist idea of liberation (nirvana) from the 
Nyaya idea of liberation (apavarga).' 





‘Note that the refutation of futile rejoinder is a nice example of 
quibble. Again, there is a play on words in the original Sanskrit. 


'Herewith Nagarjuna has, as announced at the outset, crushed 
the arrogance of the heretics. It all proceeded according to the 
principles that are known from his other works (viz. that ultimately 
nothing can be conceived as one or many), but with a wit and 
virtuosity not met with elsewhere. 

It is important to note that, for Nagarjuna, the Nyaya apavarga-- 
and the Vaisesika nihSreyasa (see Ratndvali 5)--are more or less 
synonyms for the Buddhist nirvana. This "“inclusivistic" attitude 
suggests the orthodox Brahminical background of Nagarjuna. 


150 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
37. NAGARJUNA, Yuktisastika 


The following summary is based on the translation by Christian 
Lindtmer in Nagarjuniana, pp. 103-119. Use has also been made of 
the reconstruction of the first twelve stanzas into Sanskrit by 
Tola/Dragonetti, Journal of the International Association of 
Buddhist Studies 6.2, 1983, 94-123, the work referred to as "S" in 
the following summary. "“E" and "T" references are to Lindmer's 
Tibetan edition and translation cited above. A full review of 
materials on this work can be found in S pp. 94-97. 


Homage to the Buddha, who taught dependent origination, by 
which teaching arising and destruction are eliminated. 

1-3 (E102; T103; S97) Those whose awareness (buddhi = 
wisdom, prajfia) goes beyond becoming and nonbecoming know the 
real meaning of "conditions". First, things' actually coming to be, 
the source of all defects, must be obstructed. But here is a logical 
argument for rejecting the coming to be of things: If things come to 
be why isn't liberation viewed as nonbecoming? 

4-8 (E102,104; T103,105; S98) Neither coming to be nor 
nonbecoming yield liberation; only through comprehension of both 
are the great ones who have bodhi liberated. Those who do not 
really understand believe in bondage and liberation; those who 
really understand believe in neither. Coming to be and liberation 
do not both occur, since liberation just is knowledge of both. Just as 
it is supposed that there is the destruction of what has come to be 
when it is destroyed, likewise the cessation of what has come to be 
should be thought of as magical. How can anything be dissolved? 

9-12 (E104,106; T105,107; S98) Objection: If the aggregates are 
not destroyed then one will not reach liberation even when one's 
defilements are terminated--but the cessation of them is liberation. 

Answer: When one correctly understands that things are 
conditioned by ignorance one realizes there is no origination and no 
cessation. This is liberation through understanding dharma; it 
completes one's task. However, if after knowing dharma one still 
thinks there are distinctions, believes in the eternality of even the 
most subtle thing, such a person does-not understand the meaning 
of dependent origination. 

13-17 (E106; T107) Objection: If a monk whose defilements are 


YUKTISASTIKA 151 


terminated no longer transmigrates (so transmigration has an end), 
why does the Buddha deny that transmigration has any beginning? 

Answer: The idea that there is a beginning for transmigration is 
a wrong view. How can something dependently originated have a 
beginning or an end? Things appear illusorily like a mirage, without 
any start or finish. 

18-21 (E106,108; T107,109) One who thinks that a conditioned 
thing has beginning or end doesn't understand dependent 
origination. A thing dependently arisen has not actually arisen. A 
thing that has ceased because its causes are terminated is considered 
terminated itself, but how can something that has not’ naturally 
ceased be called "terminated"? So there is no arising and no 
cessation. The paths of arising and cessation are spoken of by the 
Buddha for practical purposes. 

22-23 (E108; T109) Understanding arising one understands 
cessation. By understanding cessation one understands 
impermanence, and by understanding impermanence one 
understands the correct dharma. Those who know that dependent 
origination does not arise nor cease have transcended views. 

24-27 (£108,110; T109,111) Ordinary people who believe in 
existent things are dominated by defilements; they are deceived by 
their own awareness. Those who understand existent things see 
them as impermanent, confusing, empty, without self, disconnected, 
without a resting-place, nonobject, rootless, unfixed and caused by 
ignorance throughout. 

28-32 (E110; T111) Brahma, etc., which are accepted ordinarily, 
are said by the Noble One to be false--what of everything else? One 
shouldn't expect the views of what is good held by the ignorant and 
the wise to be the same. The truth-seeker should first be told 
"everything exists" so that when he understands he will attain 
discrimination without attachment. People who don't understand 
discrimination, who merely hear the words without doing good, are 
lost. Karma and rebirth have been fully explained by the Buddha. 

33-38 (E110,112; T111,113) The Buddhas have spoken of "I" and 
"mine", "aggregates", "senses" and "elements" for practical purposes. 
The great elements, etc. exist only in consciousness; when 
understood they dissolve--so they are imaginary. Since the Buddha 
has told us nirvana is true, how could one not conclude the rest is 
false? Since he has told us the world is caused by ignorance, why 


152 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


not admit that it is a conceptual construction? When ignorance stops 
it must be clear that what stops was constructed from ignorance. 

39-42 (E112; T113) How can what is conditioned by causes be 
supposed to exist? That eternalists behave the way they do is not 
surprising; what is surprising is that Buddhists who believe in 
impermanence remain attached to things. The wise man, hearing an 
argument about what is true of X, does not agree or disagree when 
he knows X doesn't exist! 

43-45 (E114; T115) People who think there is an underived self 
or world are captivated by views about permanence and 
impermanence, etc. Those who think that positive things are 
established as real, they too are subject to the same mistakes. But 
those who think things are neither real nor unreal, like the moon 
reflected in the water, are not carried away by theories. 

46-48 (E114; T115) When one believes in positive things he is 
gripped by excessive and offensive views. It is from attachment and 
aversion that disagreements arise; they are the cause of all dogma. 
Without those beliefs defilements do not occur. So when this is 
understood dogma and defilements disappear. And it is understood 
by realizing the truth of dependent origination. The Buddha said 
that that which is dependently born is unborn. 

49-54 (E114,116; T115,117) Those with false awareness take 
what is not true as true; for them a series of appropriating and 
contention arises. The great ones have neither thesis nor contention; 
for them there can be no contrary thesis. Taking a position breeds 
defilements, but one who takes no stand is not caught. When a fool 
sees reflections he thinks they are true, but when a great soul sees 
that things are reflections he is not misled. 

55-60 (E116,118; T117,119) Fools are attached to matter, 
ordinary folk gain dispassion, but the enlightened are liberated by 
ee the essential nature of matter. Pleasure breeds attachment, 

it up one esca; ing i 
like fcneaieal man Sees iene ee sh ts de pie Bae 
and nonbeing are not subj i feenddne AO oe 

? § ject to defilements stemming from error. 
Ifa thing existed the great ones might be attached to or detached 
from it; since they have no standpoint they have neither attachment 
nor nonattachment. The one whose mind is not concerned even at 
the thought of emptiness has crossed the ocean of existence that is 
agitated by the passions. 





YUKTISASTIKA 153 


May everyone, having through this work attained merit and 
insight, gain the benefits that accrue from those two (namely, the 
two bodies of a Buddha). 


38. NAGARJUNA, Ratnavali 
Summary by Christian Lindter and K.H. Potter 


The current state of scholarship on this work is thoroughly 
reviewed by Hahn". The relation of this work's style to the question 
of its attribution to this Nagarjuna is discussed by Vetter!’ The 
edition that appears in Hahn constitutes "E" in the summary that 
appears below. Hahn's own proposed translation, announced as a 
second volume, had not appeared as of the time of the present 
work's preparation. 

In the summary that follows, we make use of Lindmer, 
Nagarjuniana, pp. 163-166 (="L"). Giuseppe Tucci's partial edition 
and translation is referred to as "T".'* The fifth book has been 
edited in Sanskrit and Tibetan in Sieglinde Dietz, "The fifth chapter 
of Nagarjuna's Ratnavali", Journal of the Nepal Research Centre 4, 
1980, 189-220 (=D). 


CHAPTER ONE 

1-5 (E2; T308-309) Paying my respects to the Buddha, I offer the 
King an account of dharma for his profit. 

When dharma rises the satisfaction of liberation eventually 
appears. From faith comes dharma, from wisdom comes truth. Of 
these, wisdom is the chief, but faith comes first. 

6-24 (E4-10; T309-313) A man of faith does not violate dharma 
out of interest, hatred, fear or delusion. One who knows whether his 
bodily, mental and verbal acts are good for him or not is truly wise. 
One does not get at dharma through ascetic practices alone--one 
cannot that way help or avoid harming others. The results of 
violation of dharma through evil actions, false speech and 
concupiscence are detailed: these are all bad acts. All frustrations, 
every woeful course, arises from bad actions, while from good acts 
arises satisfaction. Avoidance of what is bad and performance of 


154 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


what is good in body, speech and mind makes one a person of 
twofold mindfulness. By its practice one avoids bad rebirths and 
gains good ones through meditations, boundless states and the 
immeasurables. This is the dharma of the good life and its results. 

25-38 (E10-16; T313-316) In contrast, the dharma of liberation 
is subtle and deep vision. When the childish person hears "I don't 
exist, nor will I exist; nothing belongs to or ever will belong to me" 
he is fearful where the wise man is reconciled. The Buddha, who 
says only what is helpful to men, said that it is false to suppose an 
ego or something that is mine, since neither belief visits one who 
knows how things really are. Aggregates arise from egoity, and 
egoity is not an actual entity. If the seed is unreal how can the 
sprout exist? If the aggregates are seen to be unreal egoity is 
defeated, and on the defeat of egoity there is no possibility of the 
aggregates’ reality. 

The ego is like the reflection of a face in a mirror; without the 
mirror no face will appear--just so, without the imputation of 
aggregates no ego will appear. Life is like a circle of fire: it whirls 
without beginning or end, its three stages (ego, karma, birth) 
causing each other. The ego cannot be proved to be produced by 
itself, by another, or both. It can't be shown to exist in past, present 
or future. When this is realized the ego is destroyed along with 
karma and rebirth. Having realized this a person finds it difficult to 
believe that the world is any one way and not another, existent or 
nonexistent. 

39-42 (E16-18; T316-317) The unwise man, hearing this dharma 
that terminates all frustrations, fears a condition that is unterrifying. 
You do not fear the nonexistence of all this in nirvana; why do you 
fear the nonexistence of it here? If you savor the absence of 
aggregates and self at liberation, why aren't you pleased to know 
they are absent in this very life? Though nirvana is not even an 
absence--it is the destruction of the idea of both presence and 
absence. 

43-51 (E18-22; T317-319) The denial of karma's operation is 
nihilism; it breeds bad lower realms of rebirth and is a false view. 
The positive view that effects of karma do arise is a right view and 
leads to good rebirths. But when these negative and positive views 
are both avoided one has surmounted vice and virtue; this is said to 
be liberation. Realizing that the arising of anything is caused, one 





RATNAVALI 155 


avoids nihilism. Realizing the cessation of everything with their 
causes avoids eternalism. A cause cannot precede nor accompany 
its effect; thus the production of a thing cannot be real even 
conventionally. 

When one appreciates the truth of mutual dependence, e.g., of 
short with long, of light with lamp, and learns that causality is like 
this he is no longer subject to nihilism, since he allows that things 
really are displayed in different ways to us. Still, that very display 
breeds the cessation of things, which precludes their independent 
reality. Thus one is liberated from both views. 

52-56 (E22-24; T319-320) If a mirage were really water one 
would find it so when one gets closer to it. Since one doesn't it's a 
mirage. Likewise, this world, which appears differently when one 
gets closer to the truth about it, must be like the mirage. A mirage 
looks like real water but is neither water nor real, just as the 
aggregates look like a real self but are actually neither a self nor 
real. If someone, seeing a mirage, goes up to it and, finding no 
water, says water doesn't exist at all, he is a fool. Likewise, if a man 
takes this world either to exist or to be nonexistent, he is a fool. 
And there is no liberation for a fool. 

57-61 (E24-26; T320-321) The nihilist gets bad courses, the 
realist good courses of existence. But those who know how things 
actually are, accepting: neither view, attain liberation. For us there 
is no thesis to be proved, no rules of conduct, no awareness even; 
but since we depend on enlightenment, ours is the real nihilism; so 
why should we be called (ordinary) nihilists?! Ask anyone-- 
Samkhyas, Vaisesikas, Jains, Pudgalavadins--whether they share our 
view that is beyond both realism and nihilism. 

62-66 (E26-28; T321-322) The Buddha taught this deep doctrine: 
How can the world be real? It is not born, it does not disappear, it 
doesn't persist even for a moment--it is beyond time. Neither the 
world nor nirvana exists at any time--so how can they be really 
different? Since nothing persists, nothing arises or is destroyed. If 
things are naturally changing they are momentary; if there is no 
change how can you explain the differences between things? 

67-72 (E28--30; 1322-324) Momentariness implies that 
something persists partially or totally. But no difference between 
those two cases can be seen--so both theories are wrong. If things 
are momentary how can they exist? How can one be older than 


156 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


another? If things are not momentary one thing cannot be older 
than another either. 

If a moment ends it must begin and persist--but then, having 
three parts, it can't be a moment. And if the three parts are 
themselves moments divided into three parts, being with beginning, 
middle and end is incapable of an explanation either as natural or 
as induced. 

Nothing can be single, since it has many parts; but nothing can 
be without parts either. But without singleness plurality doesn't 
exist and vice-versa. 

Existence can only fail to exist if it is destroyed or countered. But 
if existence is impossible how can it be destroyed or countered? 

73-77 (E30-32; T323-325) So liberation doesn't involve the 
cessation of anything. That's why the Buddha refused to answer 
whether the world has an end or not. He did not try to convey his 
dharma to those unable to understand it. Those liberated ones who 
know the truth say that the dharma involves commitment to no 
thesis, indicating there is nothing one can depend on. Ordinary 
people want something they can depend on; they fear this dharma 
that refuses to give them any such thing, and so are lost. And being 
lost they want to ruin others who also fear what need not be feared. 
Take care, O King, that you not be ruined by them as well. 

76-100. L165 "...The author finally lays down a method according 
to agama of how one can argue that there is neither a pudgala nor 
any dharma, such as the skandhas, mahabhiitas, dhatus, etc., and 
thus personally realize the nairatmyadvaya of Mahayana, or moksa." 


CHAPTER TWO 


1-6 (E40-42; T240-241) Just as a tree when split along with its 
parts is nothing, so the self (purusa) when split along with its 
elements is nothing. Thus the Buddhas say that all factors are 
without self; they understand the nature of the elements and their 
unreality. Thus actually neither self nor nonself is acceptable. So 
the Buddha denied both views. He said that what is seen or heard, 
etc., is neither true nor false. From any hypothesis its denial comes; 
neither are actual. So really speaking the world is beyond both truth 
and falsity; it admits neither existence nor nonexistence. How then 
could the omniscient one say that all this that cannot be sensibly 





RATNAVALI 157 


spoken of has an end or is endless, is dual or nondual? 

7-15 (E42-44; T241-242) Objection: Many Buddhas have come 
and gone and many exist now. This implies the existence of time. 
Since there's no reason to suppose new beings replacing those who 
are gone, how could the beginning and end of things be left 
unexplained by the Buddha? 

Answer: That is the depth of the dharma, which keeps it secret 
from ordinary folk. Buddhas teach that the universe is maya. A 
magical elephant appears by maya to be born and die, though really 
there is no birth or death; likewise the world appears to begin and 
end, though actually there is neither beginning nor ending. The 
world, like the magical elephant, comes from and goes nowhere--it 
is merely due to delusion, it doesn't exist anywhere. So what is this 
world in reality, this world which, transcending the threefold 
temporal relation, neither exists nor fails to exist except in ordinary 
usage? 

16-23 (E46-48; T242-243) We do not recognize the impurity of 
the body even though the body is gross and perceptible--why should 
you expect this subtle, deep doctrine to be easily understood? That's 
why the Buddha, when he learned this dharma, didn't at first 
explain it; he realized it was difficult for ordinary folk to 
understand. If wrongly understood this doctrine causes destruction 
“wv leading to nihilism. Others who criticize it, thinking themselves 
wise, .~ to hell, ruined by their criticism. Just as undigested food 
destroys one but that same food when well digested produces long 
life, health and strength, so misunderstood truth destroys one, but 
when rightly understood produces satisfaction and enlightenment. 
So, abandoning criticism and nihilism, seek right understanding in 
order to gain all your purposes. 

24-27 (E48-50; 1243-244) Egoism derives from wrong 
understanding of dharma, and from that good as well as bad karma 
arises, which in turn gives rise to good and bad rebirths. As long as 
this dharma, which dispels egoism, is not understood, you should 
apply yourself carefully to the dharma consisting of giving, morality 
and patience. One who acts according to dharma does not sink in 
this world or the next. From dharma one gets satisfaction and has 
no cause to fear during life or at the time of death; he experiences 
satisfaction in another world, and always practices the dharma. 

28-32 (E50-52; T244-245) Dharma alone is the highest policy; 


158 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the world is fond of dharma, and when that fondness is secured one 
does not stray in this life or the next. What is anti-dharma 
displeases the world, and when the world is displeased one is not 
glad, in this life or the next. How can those who cheat others 
suppose evil awareness, deceptive and leading to bad rebirths, to be 
a purposeful science? How can cheating others be deemed good 
policy when on the contrary he deceives himself for thousands of 
rebirths? If you want to displease your enemy, give up sin and adopt 
good qualities; thus you will get what benefits you and your enemy 
will be displeased! 

33-46 (E52-58; T245-246) The virtues of giving, kind speech, and 
helping others are extolled, and a number of wise and inspirational 
stanzas follow. 

51-100 (E (Tibetan) 61-71) L165: "Devices for abandoning the 
defilements are given (41-74). By following the dharma the king 
will succeed in obtaining the thirty-two laksanas and the 80 
anuvyafijanas specific to a mahapurusa." 


CHAPTER THREE 


1-100 (E72-91) (in Tibetan) L, p. 165: "The third chapter, 
*Bodhisambharaka... resumes (1-10) the traditional doctrine of the 
mahdpurusalaksana. Now (12-13) a couple of significant verses 
succinctly summarize the entire purpose of Mahayana in theory and 
practice, viz. the attainment of Buddhahood. It has two aspects, a 
tupakaya which is the outcome of an immense mass of merit 
(punyasambhara), and a dharmakaya, the result of an unlimited 
jfia@nasambhara. After this culmination the remaining 86 verses 
depict some of the endless forms a bodhisattvacarya...intent upon 
punyasambhara may take motivated by karund. It is a life of mental 
and physical happiness (sukha, cf. I, 4). In another cardinal stanza 
(30) the notion of sambhdra is linked to that of abhyudaya and 
nihsreyasa (cf. I, 3-4). With a wealth of casuistic details, often of 
great cultural interest, the king is advised to benefit himself as well 





RATNAVALI 159 
as others by developing the paramitas."* 
CHAPTER FOUR 


1-45 (E92-108; T423-427) Advice is offered to the King on how 
to conduct himself properly in his role. 

46-55 (E110-112; T427-429) Even if you, as king, obtain the 
world with its four continents, still you can only enjoy two kinds of 
satisfaction--physical and mental. Physical satisfaction is merely the 
feeling of the nonexperiencing of frustration. Mental satisfaction is 
just conceptual identification through conceptual constructions. In 
this world all satisfaction is really useless. Only when we are aware 
of something can satisfaction arise; everything else is irrelevant 
inasmuch as one is not aware of it. When one's sense-organs--say his 
eyes--are fixed on a content but there is no conceptual construction 
one will not feel satisfaction. 

Only one content of one sense-organ can be appreciated at a 
time, since when one's awareness is taking place nothing else is a 
content of awareness. The internal organ, making its object 
something that has been apprehended by a sense-organ and is past, 
constructing it, believes it to be satisfying. In this world, since one 
sense can only know one thing at a time, an organ without a 
content is purposeless and an object without that sense is likewise 
purposeless. Just as the birth of.a son requires parents, so the birth 
of an awareness requires a sense-organ like the eye. 

56-61 (E114-116; T429-430) Past and future objects and 
awarenesses are useless, and the present ones also, since they can't 
be distinguished from those past and future ones. Perception is no 
more of useful objects than is a "wheel of fire" seen when a torch is 
whipped around. Organs and objects can't be useful, since the five 
aggregates are themselves useless. If the aggregates operated alone 
fire could burn without fuel; if their combination is required the 
aggregates lack characteristics of their own. Since in either case the 





1."Note that while the theme of this chapter is the same as that of 
*Bodhisambharaka...the treatment of this ‘endless subject’...differs 
so much that the author hardly ever has to repeat himself." (L, 
165) 


160 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


aggregates are useless, their combination is as well. The same 
argument shows the uselessness of consciousness, feelings, 
identifications and conditionings. Really there is nothing real! 

62-64 (E116; T430) Satisfaction is only the lack of frustration; 
frustration derives from lack of satisfaction. By seeing that 
everything lacks an essential nature one precludes the desire that 
follows satisfaction and so attains the stopping of frustration; thence 
stems liberation. 

Objection: How can that be seen? 

Answer: Practically, it is awareness that sees, but awareness can't 
occur without accompanying mental factors, nor need it occur 
without those factors, since it is rendered functionless thereby. 

65-85 (E116-124; T430-433) Finding the world useless and thus 
seeing it as it is, lacking any appropriating, one becomes released, 
like fire when the fuel has run out. 

The Bodhisattva who sees this is sure to be enlightened, but out 
of compassion continues to be reborn. The Buddha has explained 
this in the Mahayana. One who abuses the Mahayana knowingly 
cannot tell the difference between merits and faults, thinks merits 
defects, or hates them. He knows that evil harms others and merits 
benefit them, and he still abuses the Mahayana. One who hates the 
Mahayana is burnt, even if he possesses faith, should he hate 
through confusion or anger. Even if it is frustrating a man must 
destroy what is not good for him. 

86-89 (E126; T433) In Mahayana emptiness is the absence of 
rebirth; for other systems it is destruction. In fact, destruction and 
absence of rebirth are identical. How then can the rest of the 
Mahayana be unacceptable to the wise? 

It is not easy to understand what Buddhas mean. So guard 
yourself with equanimity on issues of doctrine. 

90-93 (E126-128; T433-434) Question: In the vehicle of the 
disciples the vows and virtues of Bodhisattvas are not mentioned. 
How, then, can one become a Bodhisattva by following that 
teaching? 

Answer: The Buddha didn't happen to speak of that. But what 
other authority is there? It is taught in the Mahayana and so should 
be accepted by wise persons. 

94-100 (E128-130; T434) The Buddha taught the dharma to 
different pupils for different purposes. To some he preached 


RATNAVALI 161 


conversion, to others morals, to others escape from duality, to 
others the terrifying principle beyond duality, to still others 
emptiness and compassion. Thus one should outgrow repugnance 
towards Mahayana and make peace with it if one desires true 
realization. Having faith and following it one will attain liberation. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


1-100 (D193-199) L166: "As we saw the dharma has a nivrtti- 
and a pravrtti-aspect (1,22). It was thus shown how a grhastha 
should abstain from; the ten akusaladharmapatha and instead collect 
punya by engaging himself in the perfection of dana, sila, ksanti, 
etc. Now the author focuses on the duties of a pravrajita. 
Disciplining himself in the (three) siksds..., the code of pratimoksa 
and studying the siitras, etc., he should abandon the fifty-seven 
dosas..." 

"Having thus abandoned these and other dosas, a bodhisattva 
performs the six paruinitas in a spirit of karunad (35-39). Doing so 
he will gradually advance through the ten bodhisattvabhiimis...and 
accomplish his task by finally becoming a buddha (40-64). While 
still a Bodhisattva he must not forget to perform the 
saptavidhanuttarapuja regularly (65-87). A final exhortation to 
practise Buddhism so as to attain bodhi for the benefit of all living 
beings (88-101)." 


39. NAGARJUNA, Pratityasamutpadahrdaya 


The text adopted for the preparation of this summary is one of 
several Tibetan translations which appears in the gTen-gyur. The 
Tibetan translation followed here was made in the first quarter of 
the ninth century by Jinamitra, Danaéila, Silendrabodhi and Ye-ses- 
sde under the auspices of Khri-srong-lde-btsan. "E" references are to 
the Sanskrit restoration from this text by L. Jamspal and Peter Della 
Santina published in the Journal of the Department of Buddhist 
Studies, University of Delhi 2.1, 1974, 29-32. "T" references are to 
the translation in the same article, pp. 20-24. We have replaced the 
translations of technical terms in the original by those used in the 
present Volume. 


162 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOHIES 
Summary by Peter Della Santina 


The karikds are widely attributed to Nagarjuna. In this case the 
traditional attribution has been largely accepted by modern scholars, 
not least on the strength of the fact that Candrakirti cites a karika 
and a half from the work in his Prasannapada.'” 

It seems reasonable to assume that only the first five of the seven 
verses found in the Tibetan actually belong to the original period of 
composition. This assumption follows from the fact that the 
commentary Vyakhyana, by one Suddhamati, covers only the first 
five stanzas. 

The —Pratityasamutpadahrdayakarika, although short, _ is 
undoubtedly an important work because of the axiological nature of 
the topic which it treats. The value of declamatory and didactic 
statement on the part of Nagarjuna with regard to the central 
doctrine of the Buddhist tradition, the doctrine of dependent 
origination, can scarcely be questioned given the polemical 
orientation of works such as 33.Milamadhyamakakarika and 
35.Sinyatdsaptati. The treatment accorded to the doctrine of 
dependent origination by Nagarjuna in the present work has to be 
seen as having a formative function for the whole of the Mahayana 
tradition. 


1-3 (E29-31; T20-22) 1. The twelve discrete constituents of 
dependent origination which were taught by the Sage are wholly 
included in three: defilements, actions and frustrations. 

2. The first (ignorance), eighth (desire) and ninth (attachment) 
are defilements, the second (traces) and tenth (existence) are 


actions, while the remaining seven are frustrations. Thus the twelve 
elements are included in three. 


3. From the three two originate, from the two originate seven, 
and from these seven, in turn, originate the three; thus the wheel 
of existence revolves again and again. 

An analogous definition of the term "discrete" (bheda) suggests 
the twelve factors are separate in a manner analogous to the parts 
of a chariot. 

The term "Sage" (muni) which occurs in the first verse is defined 

ict : : 
as "mighty of body, voice and mind." 

A number of purported causes extraneous to the twelve factors 


PRATITYASAMUTPADAHRDAYA 163 


of dependent origination are discarded. God, nature, time and the 
like are cited as examples of noncauses.? 

The twelve factors are interdependently originated, i.e., they are 
dependent upon one another as the roof-beams of a house depend 
on one another. 

An important qualification of the metaphor of the wheel, 
expressive of cyclical existence, is offered. While the rotation of a 
wheel is characterized by the regular succession of points on the 
circumference following upon one another in order, this regular 
movement is not characteristic of cyclical existence, in which the 
points on the circumference of the wheel, i-e., the six sensory 
realms, arise in irregular succession for an experiencing subject. 

4 (E31-32; T20,22) Cause and effect are declared to exclusively 
constitute the world. Apart from cause and effect, no sentient 
being, no self exists. The factors are declared to be empty, but this 
does not contradict the causal dependence of factors, because from 
factors which are empty empty factors originate. 


40.NAGARJUNA, Suhyilekha 
Summary by Peter Della Santina 


Nagarjuna's Suhrllekha is most highly regarded as the precursor 
of an entire class of Buddhist literature. The class in question 
includes all those expositions of the Buddhist path to perfection 
which aspire to be both practical and comprehensive. Hstian-tsang 
affirms that the Suhrllekha had achieved great popularity in India 
as a didactic poem. The form, however, was to achieve its greatest 
diffusion in Tibet, where almost all the great teachers of the various 
traditions composed expositions of the Buddhist path more or less 





1. A similar list appears in the 40.Suhrilekha. See its summary 
below, verse 50. 


164 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


closely modelled on Nagarjuna's letter.) Such compositions, 
however, never totally supplanted Nagarjuna's own work, which 
continued to be used very widely as an introductory manual. The 
letter enjoyed great popularity in China too, as is shown by the 
several translations of it in Chinese. 

No Sanskrit fragment of this work remains. It is available in three 
Chinese translations (T.1672-1674), the earliest of which, by 
Gunavarman, stems from 431 A.D., and two Tibetan translations. 
There are no references to it prior to one in a work of Candrakirti. 
These dates lead Sieglinde Dietz’ to doubt the ascription of this 
work to our present Nagarjuna. Christian Lindmer'”!, on the other 
hand, is inclined to support that ascription, finding a number of 
parallels with Nagarjuna's other works. Bharat Singh Upadhyaya!” 
writes that Nagarjuna "was a friend and contemporary of the 
Satavahana king, Yajiiasri Gautamiputra (166-196 A.D.)", to whom 
the Suhyilekha was written. Other scholars provide differing 
identifications for this king, however. 

"T" references are to the translation from the Tibetan in Lobzang 
Jamspal, Ngawang Samten Chophel and Peter della Santina, 
Nagarjuna's Letter to King Gautamiputra, Delhi 1983. The Tibetan 
text is available as an Appendix to that volume. Several other 
translations are available; see Bibliography, Third Edition, #47.8. 


1-3. (T1-2) The text commences with a few words of 
encouragement addressed to the reader. The contents of the letter 
are worthy of study, because merit arises from hearing the Sugata's 
words upon which the letter is based. The aesthetic merits of the 
composition are of no relevance. It ought to be taken seriously, 
because it contains an exposition of the Buddha's teaching. In the 
same way, an image of the Buddha is worshipped by the wise 
regardless of its material or aesthetic value. Finally, although the 
text may not contain anything actually new, the teachings it 
contains may be brought into clearer relief by a fresh presentation. 

4 (T2-3) Six items worthy of being borne in mind are mentioned, 


os 
1.Such expositions include: The Jewel Ornament of Liberation of 
sGam-po-pa and The Great and Small Graduated Path treatises of 
Tson-kha-pa, to name only a couple. 


SUHRLLEKHA 165 


viz., the Buddha, the dharma, the sangha, giving, morality and the 
ods.! 

: 5 (TS) One is asked to practice the ten precepts,” to abstain from 

alcohol and to sustain oneself by means of a right livelihood. 

6 (T5) Wealth is said to be unreliable and insubstantial. 
Therefore one is encouraged to give to monks, Brahmins, to poor 
and friends. Giving is said to be like a kinsman for the future life. 

7 (T6) Morality is said to be the foundation of all virtues. 

8 (T6-7) Nagarjuna refers to attaining Buddhahood by means of 
the practice of the six perfections, viz., giving, morality, patience, 
energy, concentration and wisdom. 

9 (T7) The text encourages one to revere one's parents. It is said 
that such reverence will bring renown in the present life and rebirth 
in the fortunate realms in the future. 

10-11 (T8) The text refers to the eight precepts.* It likens them 
to the morality practised by the Arhats. It goes on to assert that 
their practice can be the cause of achieving the form of a god of the 


1The advice, like much of the contents of the letter, is clearly 
largely intended for laymen. The reference to the gods may be 
explained in terms of the exemplary function. In other words, by 
bearing in mind the gods, the practitioner may be encouraged to 
liken his own practice of giving and morality to the practice of these 
virtues by the gods in the past. 


"They are: avoidance of killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, 
lying, slander, malicious speech, idle speech, covetousness, 
malevolence and erroneous views. 


°They are the five precepts, viz., the avoidance of killing, of 
stealing,of sexual misconduct, of lying and of alcohol, and the three 
additional special precepts, viz., avoidance of food after midday, of 
high and luxurious seats and beds and of entertainments and 
adornments. 


166 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


realm of desire in the future life.! 

12 (T8) Thirteen bad factors which Nagarjuna terms enemies are 
enumerated. The list commences with avarice and ends with the 
pride of race, appearance, learning, youth and power. 

13-14 (T9) Nagarjuna extols the value of being heedful. 
Heedfulness is said to be the cause of deathlessness, that is, nirvana, 
while heedlessness is said to be the cause of death, that is to say, 
samsara. Four examples of persons who have changed their destiny 
by means of developing heedfulness are cited. They are Nanda, 
Angulimala, Ajatasatru and Udayana.? 

15 (T9-100 The practice of patience is extolled in counter- 
distinction to the common practice of austerities. One who avoids 
anger and practices patience, it is said, attains the irreversible stage. 

16 (T10) Nagarjuna admonishes one to cast off resentment. 
Harboring the notions that one has been abused, constrained, 
defeated or robbed by others produces quarrels, but one who does 
not harbor such notions sleeps peacefully. 

17 (T10) Nagarjuna offers a threefold classification of mental 
states determined by their relative persistence. Relatively persistent 
States are likened to letters engraved upon stone. Those of lesser 
persistence are likened to letters scrawled upon earth, while those 
of the least persistence are likened to letters written upon water. 
Nagarjuna says that one should seek to develop persistent good 
States, but should seek to make bad states as ephemeral as letters 
written upon water. 

18 (T11) Speech may be pleasant, truthful or wrong. Avoiding 
the last category, one should seek to speak what is pleasant and 
what is true. 


ee 


‘The realm of desire, the lowest of the three dhatus, includes, in 


addition to hell beings, hungry ghosts, animals and men, and a 
number of gods 


*Nanda was the relative of the Buddha who was obsessed by 
sensual desire. Angulimala was the infamous bandit who was 
converted by the Buddha. Ajatagatru murdered his father, Bimbisara, 
then King of Magadha. Udayana murdered his mother. 


SUHRLLEKHA 167 


19 (T11) A fourfold classification of migration conditioned by 
karma is given. The metaphor of light and darkness is employed. 
The migration of sentient beings is therefore either from light to 
light or from darkness to darkness. Again, the migration of sentient 
beings may also be from light to darkness or from darkness to light. 
Among these, the first is to be preferred. 

20 (T12) A fourfold classification of the motivations and overt 
behavior of individuals is presented. The simile of mangoes is used 
to carry the message. Mangoes are said to be of four kinds: those 
which are green, but appear to be ripened; those which are ripened, 
but appear to be green; those which are green and also appear to 
be green; and lastly, those which are ripened and also appear to be 
ripened. 

21 (T12) Nagarjuna enjoins one to overcome desire for the wives 
of others by regarding them in accord with their age as either 
mother, sister or daughter. If desire still persists, however, one 
should meditate upon impurity. 

22 (T13) The special and precious nature of the mind is indicated 
by means of the similes of a son, a treasure and of life itself. The 
mind, which is fickle, should be protected and withdrawn from 
sense desires, which are likened to a snake, poison, a weapon, an 
enemy and fire. 

23 (T13) Sense desires are likened to a fruit which, although it 
has a pleasant appearance and may even be enjoyable to eat, 
produces disastrous consequences when ingested. Because sense 
desires bind one to samsara, they should be renounced. 

24 (T14) One who is able to conquer the momentary objects of 
the senses is worthy of the name of a hero far more than one who 
may win victory in worldly battle. 

25 (T14) Meditation upon the impurity of the female body is 
offered as a remedy for sensual desire. Specific reference is made to 
the impurities issuing from the nine bodily orifices. 

26 (T15) Sense desires can never be satisfied. The example of a 
leper who is supposed to have sought relief by immersing his 
leprous insect-ridden limbs in fire is offered. 

27 (T15) Nagarjuna refers to seeing phenomena in accord with 
the ultimate truth (paramarthasatya). He affirms that no other 

practice has similar quality. 

28 (T16-17) Morality and wisdom elevate one who possesses 


168 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


them above the average run of men, even though one may lack 
other common qualities. 

29 (T17-18) The verse refers to the eight worldly factors: profit, 
loss, happiness, pain, fame, notoriety, praise and blame. One is 
asked to regard the eight with equanimity. 

30-31 (T18-19) In these verses Nagarjuna commences a 
discussion of karma. He admonishes one not to commit bad actions 
even for the sake of others, because although such actions may have 
been done for other's sake, their effects will be borne by one alone. 
Although the effects of bad actions may not appear at once, they 
will appear at the time of death. Therefore bad actions should be 
avoided. 

32 (T19) Nagarjuna refers to the seven treasures of the nobles: 
faith, morality, giving, study, modesty, humility and wisdom.' 

33 (T20) Nagarjuna again draws directly upon the words of the 
Buddha when he refers to six activities which are the cause of the 
loss of wealth and good name.? They are: gambling, lavish 
entertainment, unwholesome friends, laziness, drink and aimless 
wandering at night. 

34-35 (T21) Satisfaction, says Nagarjuna, is the best of all riches. 
One who is content with what he has, though he may have little, is 
really the happiest of men. The advantages of renunciation are 
elaborated. Possessions only bring suffering. The case of the many- 
headed Naga* whose sufferings were as many as his many heads is 
cited in support of the statement. 

36-37 (T22) Nagarjuna again draws upon the words of the 
Buddha in order to give the reader some advice regarding the choice 


ee 


'The seven treasures of the holy were given to Rahula by the 
Buddha when the former approached him to request his inheritance. 


*See the Sigdlovada-sutta of the Pali canon. 
®Nagas are creatures which have bodies half human and 


half serpent. They are believed to dwell in the earth and in 
bodies of water. 


SUHRLLEKHA 169 


of wives.’ There are seven kinds of wives, three to be avoided and 
four to be accepted. The three to be avoided are those who are: 
associated with enemies of the husband, disrespectful toward the 
husband, or of a thieving nature. The four to be accepted are those 
who are kind, affectionate, beneficial or submissive. 

38 (T22) One is encouraged to regard food with indifference, 
that is, with neither attachment nor aversion. Food is simply 
required for sustaining the body. It is likened to medicine. 

39 (T23) Nagarjuna encourages the reader to minimize the time 
allocated to sleep. He advises sleeping mindfully only during the 
middle watch of the night in order to dedicate more time to 
practice. 

40 (T23) Nagarjuna prescribes the practice of the four 
immeasurables: loving kindness, compassion, sympathy and 
equanimity. He says that even if the ultimate goal, that is, nirvana, 
is not reached, still through the practice of the four, the happiness 
of the world of Brahma will be achieved. 

41 (T24) Next, the four trances are treated. The practice of the 
four trances frees the practitioner from the vicissitudes of the sphere 
of desire and he can achieve rebirth among the gods of the material 
sphere. The names of the four gods of the material sphere are 
mentioned. They are: Brahma, Abhasvara, Subhakrtsna and 
Brhatphala. 

42-43 (T24-25) Nagarjuna returns to the theme of karma in two 
verses. A scheme for assessing the weight of karmic actions is 
indicated. The scheme includes five subjective and objective 
components whose presence or absence determines the weight of a 
given karmic deed. The subjective components are: persistence, that 
is, the repetition of an act; intentionality; and the act's 
unmitigatedness. The objective components have reference to the 
indebtedness of the subject to the object of an act, and the worth of 
the object toward which an act is directed. 

A small measure of bad karma may be dissipated by a large 
measure of good karma, just as a small measure of salt is dissipated 


1The scheme is taken from the Buddha's discourse to the 
daughter-in-law of Anathapindika, the famous lay disciple of the 
Buddha. 


170 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


by the waters of the Ganges, but a small measure of good karma 
cannot dissipate a small measure of bad karma. Therefore one 
should seek to acquire a large measure of good karma. 

44 (T25) The five obstructions well-known to Abhidharmic 
literature are mentioned. They are: desire, doubt, sloth and torpor, 
ill will, and restlessness and worry. Nagarjuna calls them thieves 
which steal one's good karma. . 

45 (T26) The five faculties are listed. They are: faith, energy, 
mindfulness, concentration and wisdom. They are termed strength, 
power and the most excellent.! 

46 (T27) One is reminded that one's own actions are the cause 
of one's failure to escape from old age, sickness and death. The 
recollection of this fact, it is said, functions as an antidote to 
arrogance. 

47 (128) The importance of cultivating right understanding in 
order to gain heaven and liberation is emphasized. Even persons 
who perform meritorious actions without right understanding are 
liable to evil consequences. 

48 (T28) Mindfulness with regard to the antidotes to the four 
perverted views is advocated. One should recall frustration, 
impermanence, not-self and impurity. 

49 (T29) An analysis of the self and the aggregates in relation to 
each other is presented. Matter is not the self, the self does not 
possess matter, the self is not found within matter, nor is matter 
found within the self. The remaining aggregates should be examined 
in a similar manner in order to comprehend that they are empty. 

50 (T29) A number of spurious causes of the aggregates are 
rejected. They include: change, time, nature, God and the like. The 
aggregates, it is said, originate from ignorance, karma and craving. 

51 (T30) The three fetters: attachment to the self, doubt, and 
belief in the sufficiency of moral observances and austerities are 





'The verse refers to strength, power and the most excellent, 
which are related by the commentaries, both Indian and Tibetan, to 
the four degrees of the path of application (prayogamarga). 





SUHRLLEKHA 171 


obstacles to liberation.! 

52 (T31) The importance of self-reliance is emphasized. 
Liberation depends upon oneself alone, therefore one is encouraged 
to cultivate the four noble truths through the devices of morality, 
study and concentration. 

53 (T32) Reference is made to the three disciplines: morality, 
meditation and wisdom. More than one hundred and fifty precepts 
are said to be included in these three.” 

54 (T33) Mindfulness regarding the body, Nagarjuna says, was 
taught by the Buddha to be the only path to liberation. Therefore 
one should cultivate mindfulness regarding the body. 

55-57 (T33-35) Human life is impermanent like a bubble of 
water. It is a matter of wonder that one continues to live for any 
length of time at all, given the many obstacles to life. At the time of 
death the body, which is in any case insubstantial, will be disposed 
of in a variety of ways. Its elements will be separated and 
dispersed. Inasmuch as even large and apparently solid objects like 
the earth, etc. are subject to destruction at the end of an eon, surely 
human beings too cannot be expected to endure for long. 

58 (T35) Samsara is in general like a banana tree. It is 
impermanent, without substance or refuge. Therefore one should 
seek to achieve detachment from samsara. 

59 (136) Next, the unique and precious nature of human life, 
endowed with the conditions conducive to the practice of religion, 
is treated. The canonical analogy of the tortoise inhabiting the ocean 
is cited by way of illustration of the difficulty of achieving a human 
birth endowed with the right conditions.* 

60 (T37) Human life is likened to a golden vase ornamented with 
jewels. One who would use such a vessel for containing filth would 
surely be considered foolish. Therefore human life should be used 


1The three fetters referred to in the letter are the three broken 
by a stream-winner on the Arhat path. 


The reference to the figure of one hundred and fifty is said by 
the commentaries to indicate the monastic codes. 


3See Majjhima Nikaya III, 169. 


172 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


for the practice of religion. 

61 (T37) Nagarjuna refers to four special conditions which the 
reader of this letter possesses that make the practice of religion even 
easier for him. They are: dwelling in a particularly suitable place, 
relying upon holy teachers, religious application in former lives, and 
the accumulation of merit. 

62 (T38) Nagarjuna specially indicates the importance of good 
company. The path to freedom, he says, is accomplished by 
consulting a good friend. 

63-64 (T38) The importance of freedom from the eight 
unfavorable situations is indicated. When one has achieved freedom 
from birth among heretics, animals, hungry ghosts, hell beings, 
barbarians, fools, gods and a locality where no teaching of dharma 
exists, one should strive to put an end to birth. 

65 (T38-39) Samsara is full of frustration, disease and death. It 
is therefore fit to be lamented over. 

66 (T39) There are no certainties in regard to relations among 
sentient beings in the universe of samsdra. Fathers become sons, 
mothers become wives and friends become enemies, and vice versa. 

67 (T39) Moreover, one has experienced countless instances of 
birth in the universe of cyclical existence. If the mother's milk one 
has drunk in the course of countless existences were measured, it 
would equal the water in the four great oceans. 

68 (T40) Not only has one experienced countless instances of 
birth, but one has also experienced countless instances of death and 
rebirth as well. If the skeletons one has had in the course of 
countless existences were to be heaped up one upon another, the 
pile would exceed the legendary Mount Sumeru in height. Again, if 
the entire earth were to be made into bits the size of juniper seeds, 
it would still not suffice to equal the number of mothers one has 
had. 

69 (T40) There is no certainty of position either in samsara. Even 
Indra, the king of the gods and the universal monarch fall from their 
lofty positions and become the servants of servants in Samsara. 

70 (T41) The theme of the uncertainty of position in samsdra is 





1.The four special conditions are termed cakras. They also occur, 
according to Chr. Lindmer, in Ariguttara Nikaya II. 





SUHRLLEKHA 173 


elaborated further. Even though one may enjoy the company of 
heavenly nymphs in the paradises of the sphere of desire, one can 
again find oneself in the hells where one's organs are tortured by 
the instruments of infernal torment. 

71 (T41) Even though one may experience the pleasure of 
dwelling upon the summit of Mount Sumeru where the surface of 
the earth accommodates one's footsteps, one may again find oneself 
in one of the hells where the suffering of treading upon burning 
embers and decomposing corpses is experienced. ; 

72-73 (T41-42) The theme in hand is further developed in two 
verses. The pleasure of heavenly gardens and rivers where celestial 
nymphs play may soon be replaced by the gardens and rivers to be 
found in the hells. There the trees are armed with leaves like swords 
and the rivers are hot and difficult to bear. 

74-75 (T42) Even having attained the station of the gods of the 
sphere of desire or even that of those of the material sphere, one 
can still become fuel for the hottest of the hells (avict). Even having 
attained the station of the sun or the moon, one can still find 
oneself engulfed in endless darkness. 

76 (T43) Death can occur at any time and precipitate one into 
unknown situations. Therefore, while the opportunity is at hand, 
one should practise good actions of body, speech and mind, because 
only good actions are of any use at the time of death. 

77-88 (T44-47) Nagarjuna commences a review of the suffering 
in the hells. Those who have committed many unwholesome actions, 
he says, will be born in the hells, like Reviving Hell (samjiva), Black 
Thread Hell (kalasiitra), Crushing Hell (samghata), Howling Hell 
(raurava), Great Howling Hell (mahdaraurava), Heating Hell 
(tapana), Intense Heating Hell (pratapana) and Uninterrupted Hell 

(avici). A few examples of the suffering in the hells are given. There 
the inmates are pressed like sesamum, ground into flour and the 
like. Molten bronze is poured into the mouths of some, while others 
are impaled upon barbed iron stakes. There the inmates are 
attacked by dogs with iron fangs and by birds with iron claws and 
the like. They are also beset by countless insects. In yet another of 
the hells, the inmates are charred in heaps of embers and cooked in 
cauldrons like rice. ; 

Hardened criminals, habituated to committing many bad actions, 
are not moved by accounts of the hells. When merely hearing of 


174 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the suffering of the hells produces fear, the actual experience must 
be awful indeed. Freedom from desire is the most excellent of 
happinesses, while the suffering of avici is the greatest of all 
sufferings. The suffering experienced in the present life cannot be 
likened even to a fraction of the suffering experienced in the hells. 
The inmates of the hells will continue to suffer in the ways 
described until such time as the effects of the bad actions they have 
committed are exhausted. Bad actions of body, speech and mind are 
the cause of the suffering of the hells; therefore one should seek to 
avoid such actions by means of intelligence. 

89-90 (T48) The suffering of animals is considered in two verses. 
Those who stray from the path of action leading to peace are liable 
to be born as animals. Animals suffer from the pain of eating one 
another. Moreover, they are bound and beaten by man, as well as 
being killed by him for food, pearls, fur and so on. 

91-97 (T48-50) Nagarjuna devotes several verses to a 
consideration of the suffering of hungry ghosts. The hungry ghosts 
suffer continuously because of the deprivation of objects they desire. 
The suffering of the hungry ghosts engendered by their constitutions 
and situations are described in graphic detail. Even should they 
come upon a little coarse sustenance, it is said, their mouths are the 
size of the eye of needles and their throats as thin as hairs. 
Consequently, they are able to ingest such sustenance only with 
great difficulty, and all to no avail for their stomachs are as large as 
mountairis. Flames are said to issue from the mouths of some 
ee ghosts. Others vie with their fellows for even the foulest of 
‘ood. 

The hungry ghosts are said to have so little merit that even the 
sun is felt by them to be cold, while the moon is felt to be hot. 
Rivers dry up when gazed upon by hungry ghosts, and trees bearing 
fruit become withered and dry. Inasmuch as they are bound by the 
force of the bad actions they have committed, the hungry ghosts 
have to suffer in this way for a very long time. While the sufferings 
of the hungry ghosts are various, they are of one taste. Their cause 
is avarice, miserliness and ignobility. 

98-101 (T51-52) Even existence in the higher realms is beset 
with frustration. Nagarjuna dedicates four verses to the frustrations 
of the gods. Because of the pleasures experienced by the gods in the 
heavens the pain they experience on the occasion of their death and 


SUHRLLEKHA 175 


fall from heaven is all the greater. Nagarjuna refers to five signs 
which are said to appear presaging the death of a god and his fall 
from heaven: loss of beauty, boredom, the withering of flower 
adornments, the soiling of garments and appearance of bodily dirt 
and sweat. If no merit remains upon the death of a god, then, 
helpless, he is liable to be reborn even in the three lower realms of 
animals, hungry ghosts or denizens of hell. Consequently, existence 
in the heavens is not desirable. 

102 (T53) Existence among the demigods too is beset with 
frustrations. The existence of the demigods is troubled by jealousy 
and strife. Ce 

103 (TS3) As has been shown in the foregoing verses, samsara is 
full of frustration no matter where within its confines one is born. 

104 (T54) One should lose no time in striving to put an end to 
rebirth by means of transcending action, as one would not hesitate 
to extinguish a fire that had taken hold of one's head or dress. 

105 (T54) Once again the means of achieving nirvana is the three 
disciplines: morality, meditation and wisdom. Nirvana is described 
as ageless, deathless, inexhaustible and devoid of earth, water, fire, 
air, sun and moon. 

106 (TSS) Practise the seven limbs of enlightenment: 
mindfulness, energy, investigation, interest, tranquillity, 
concentration and equanimity. 

107 (T56) The importance of concentration and wisdom and 
their mutually implicit character is stressed. By means of the union 
of concentration and wisdom, the ocean of cyclical existence can be 
exhausted by one who possesses them. 

108 (T57) Avoid speculation in regard to the fourteen 
inexpressibles (avyakyta)' inasmuch as such speculation does not 
conduce to peace. 


1Viz., whether the universe is: eternal, not eternal, both eternal 
and not eternal, and neither eternal nor not eternal; whether the 
universe is finite, infinite, both finite and infinite, and neither finite 
Nor infinite; whether the Tathagata exists after death, does not exist 
after death, both exists after death and does not exist after death, 
and neither exists after death nor does not exist after death; 
whether the soul is identical with the body or different from it. 


176 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


conduce to peace. 

109-112 (T58-59) The twelve cousituents of dependent 
origination are listed. The doctrine of dependent origination is the 
profound treasure of the conqueror’s teaching. He who sees 
dependent origination sees the Buddha. 

113 (T62) The steps of the noble eightfold path are listed. 

114-115 (T62) The four noble truths are stated. Nagarjuna says 
that even the layman living in the lap of prosperity can cross the 
river of afflictions by means of the knowledge of the truths. 

116 (T64) The enlightened ones did not fall from the sky or 
spring up from the earth. They were formerly persons who were 
subject to the afflictions, but who achieved perfection through 
practice. 

117 (T64) The fundamental importance of disciplining the mind 
is indicated. Nagarjuna says: the Buddha said the mind is the root 
of all good factors. 

118 (T65) The reader is encouraged to make his life meaningful 
through the correct practice of any of the injunctions contained in 
this letter. It is admitted that it would be difficult to practise all of 
them, even for a monk living in isolation. 

119-120a (T65-66) The reader is asked to rejoice in the good 
actions of others and to dedicate his own merit to the attainment of 
Buddhahood. Through the mastery of yoga, it is said, he can attain 
countless births among gods and men. 

120b-121 (T66) The verses contain specific references to 
Avalokitesvara and Amitabha and his Buddha field. The reader is 
encouraged to become like the former.! 

122-123 (T167) The practices of giving, morality and wisdom are 
again cited. The reader is encouraged to allay the suffering of others 
and to achieve nirvana, which is faultless, ageless, fearless, peaceful, 
only an idea and supramundane. 


— 


‘The verses supply the clearest evidence of the author's 
commitment to the Mahayana. 


41.NAGARJUNA, Bodhisambharaka 


Christian Lindtner has reviewed the evidence for ascribing this 
text to this Nagarjuna. It is only available in a Chinese translation 
(T.1660) made by Dharmagupta between 605-616 A.D. The 
following reasons are given by Lindtner for assenting to Nagarjuna's 
authorship: "The external evidence is provided by two quotations 
from (this text) in Candrakirti's CatuhSatakatika...1 have also come 
across a quotation...in Asvabhava's Mahayanasamgrahopaniban- 
dhana...Moreover an early date of Bodhisambhara is ensured by the 
fact that it is quoted in the Dasabhiimikavibhasd of which a Chinese 
version from ca. 408 still exists, where an earlier one (by 
Dharmaraksa) from ca. 265 is lost. In both cases Nagarjuna was 
held to be the author." 

"T" reference are to the translation by Christian Lindtner in 
Nagarjuniana. 


1-4 (T228) The preparations for enlightenment (bodhisambhara) 
will be explained here. Question: How can they be explained, since 
they are infinite? 

Answer: True; the Buddha body has infinite qualities of which 
these preparations are the basis, and so the preparations have no 
limit. But I shall only explain a small portion of them. 

5-9 (T228-229) Perfect wisdom (prajfiaparamita) is the chief 
preparation for enlightenment. Its father is skill in the means to it, 
its mother is compassion. It includes as chief elements giving, moral 
precepts, patience, energy and trance, all due to wisdom and 
involving perfection. 

10-16 (T229-230) A bodhisattva must take care of living beings 
by trying to convert as many of them as possible. Some who gain 
instruction as disciples (Sravakayana) or singly enlightened 
(pratyekabuddhayana) are too weak to become Mahayanists. Those 
who can't achieve any of these should do good deeds. If someone 
cannot hope for heaven or liberation he should be brought to the 
fold by the advantages in this world that accrue thereby. The 
bodhisattva should have great compassion for those who cannot be 
induced to conversion. 

17-18 (T230) Skilful means (updyakaugalya) of conversion 
include gifts, teaching them the dharma, doing good to them. By 


178 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


benefitting others the bodhisattva benefits himself. 

19-27 (T230-231) By understanding the deepest element of 
factors beyond conceptual constructions attachment to everything 
is spontaneously abandoned. Unattached to profit, reputation, 
honors and satisfaction, etc., and not committed to their opposites-- 
this is renunciation. The bodhisattva should pursue these actions 
energetically as long as he has not reached the irreversible state; if 
he reaches it without pursuing them he will become a mortal 
through his carelessness and reenter the path of disciple or 
enlightened for oneself, the roots of his knowledge being cut off. 
This fate, unlike even going to hell, is an absolute hindrance to 
enlightenment, and ought to be feared. 

28-30 (T231-232) The patience of nonorigination 
(anutpddaksanti) involves seeing all as not arisen, not destroyed, 
not both, not neither, neither empty nor nonempty. When one 
cleaves to the middle path about every factor this patience of 
nonorigination is gained because all constructions are eliminated. 
Such a one will certainly become an enlightened one (buddha). 

31-33 (T232) Until one attains readiness (abhimukha) he should 
steadily practise concentration and not be careless. 

34-47 (T232-233) Enlightenment can't be gained by only a little 
merit, but even a small task must be conducive to the help of living 
beings by involving meritorious intentions. Examples of meritorious 
intentions are provided. Their value is immeasurable and leads to 
Bodhisattvahood. 

48-54 (T233-234) Buddhas are extolled and their assistance is 
sought. 

55-65 (T234-235) How the aspirant should behave is explained. 

66-76 (T235-237) Liberation is not attained directly; the 
perfection of wisdom must be ripened. Just as an archer supports 
an arrow in the target by shooting another directly through it, so 
one should aim his awareness at the goal called empty--the arrows 
of the method support it so that it does not fall into nirvana! Thus 
others are not abandoned. Even a bodhisattva who is destined for 
Buddhahood should practise the method. Despite distaste for 
samsara he still turns toward it and abandons nirvana. 

77-89 (1237-238) A bodhisattva's nature is passionate; the 
passions must be burned off to produce the seed of enlightenment. 
A bodhisattva teaches all sGstras, visits all stages and castes, does 


BODHISAMBHARAKA 179 


not flatter, deceive or boast, cultivates moral rules, contemplates in 
solitude with mindfulness, abandons bad thoughts and cultivates 
good ones, pursues his end energetically. 

90-133 (T234-244) Further description of the bodhisattva's 
methods. The descriptions gradually become advice about how to 
act under various circumstances. One should cultivate the thirty- 
seven aids to enlightenment, the five spheres of liberation, the ten 
notions of impurity, the eight thoughts of a great soul, the five 
higher faculties, the four supernatural powers, the four boundless 
states. 

134-148 (1244-246) It is wrong for a bodhisattva to teach the 
Mahayana to those who believe in the sravaka- or pratyekabuddha- 
vehicles. Those two sorts of persons, along with those who believe 
in worldly sciences and are after worldly goods, are bad friends of 
a bodhisattva. Good friends are teachers, the Buddha, ascetics and 
monks. 

149-165 (T246-248) A wise man does not treat emptiness as the 
nature of things and base his action on it--that would be the fault 
of believing in a self-nature. One should view all factors as unborn, 
not present and not future. One should not be elated at being 
worthy through merit, nor should one be downcast if one is in need. 
When ascetics and householders have collected these things for as 
many eons as the sands of the Ganges they will attain 
enlightenment. 


42. NAGARJUNA, Vyavahdrasiddhi 
Translation by Christian Lindner 


_ This is only a fragment comprising six verses. It is quoted by 
Santaraksita in his Madhyamakdlamkara and ascribed to Nagarjuna 
in Kamalasila's commentary. The style and doctrine of the text is 
quite similar to the authentic works of Nagarjuna. The text is edited, 
translated and discussed in Lindtmer, Nagarjuniana, pp. 94-99. The 
translation is brief enough to be provided here in full: 


(1) One syllable does not make a mantra. On the other hand 
many syllables do not make a mantra either. Dependent upon 
syllables that are (therefore) unoriginated this (mantra neither 


180 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


exists) nor does not exist. 

(2) Likewise no medicine appears independently of its specific 
ingredients. It appears (like) an illusory elephant, i-e., it is not 
identical (with its causes), nor is it (absolutely) different from them. 

(3) It arises in dependent co-origination (pratityasamutpada). 
Who would (be so ignorant as to) maintain that it exists or does not 
exist! Actually visual consciousness arises (similarly) when it is 
based upon (eye and form). 

(4) Projected by the power of (his) karma and passions (kleSa), 
the appropriator arises out of existence. Form also arises in the 
same manner. Who would (be so ignorant as to) maintain that it 
exists or does not exist?! 

(5) Similarly all the (twelve) members of existence (bhavanga) 
are simply conventional designations (vyavaharatah prajfiapti). 
Consequently all phenomena such as extinction have only been 
advocated (by the Buddhas) with the purpose (of explaining the 
emptiness of the soul and the factors). 

(6) As it (appears to be) a mantra without (really being) a 
mantra, and as it (appears to be) a medicine without (really in itself 
being) a medicine, thus (all phenomena) are stated to be dependent 
(pratitya). Neither of the two (cause or effect) can be established 
(as existing independently). 


43. NAGARJUNA, Mahdayanavimsika 
Summary by Christian Lindtner 


Though this brief verse-summary of Mahayana has always 
enjoyed considerable popularity--it is often quoted as Nagarjuna's 
and there is one Chinese and two Tibetan translations--its 
authenticity is nevertheless dubious. On the other hand its style and 
doctrine show considerable similarity to some of Nagarjuna's 
authentic works. The summary below is based on the Sanskrit text 
edited by G. Tucci.'% compared with the Tibetan and Chinese 
versions edited by V. Bhattacharya, Calcutta 1931. These all differ 
considerably from the Sanskrit and from one another. 


1-3. First, the Buddha is praised for, out of compassion, having 


MAHAYANAVIMSIKA 181 


preached the dharma that is, strictly speaking, beyond words. In 
reality, i.e., from the absolute point of view, the Buddhas, all living 
beings and all karmic creations, in other words, the entire world, is 
unoriginated and empty like an illusion. 

4-11. Nevertheless, due to sheer ignorance, people imagine that 
the world of samsdra exists. Hence they experience suffering, 
happiness, etc. The manifold world is a creation of their own mind, 
and they can be compared to a painter who becomes afraid of a 
monster painted by himself. 

12-20. Had it not been for the Buddhas’ compassion we would all 
have been utterly lost. The Buddhas guide living beings out of their 
illusions, and finally, when mankind has accumulated sufficient 
merit and insight, it too becomes enlightened and understands that 
everything was created by ignorance. There is only rebirth as long 
as there is ignorance. 

Only by means of Mahayana can one ever hope to cross the 
terrible ocean of samsara. 


44. NAGARJUNA, Catuhstava 
Summary by Christian Lindtner 


If we define Buddhism as bhakti to the Bhagavat Buddha as a 
compassionate preacher of an eternal dharma that points the way 
to svarga and to moksa (by means of good karma and tattvajfiana 
respectively) it is only to be expected that his grateful devotees 
would compose hymns in praise of their Leader. The collection of 
four hymns ascribed to Nagarjuna, titled Lokatita-, Niraupamya-, 
Acintya- and Paramartha-stavas, are the only ones (among several 
others) still available in Sanskrit. (The Dharmadhdatustava is also 
available in a Sanskrit manuscript from Tibet/China but has not yet 
been edited.) The first and third were first edited by Christian 
Lindner in Nagarjuniana and reproduced, along with the less 
important second and fourth, by F. Tola and C. Dragonetti.’”° 
(47.2.13) This Tola/Dragonetti version constitutes our "E" and "T". 

The following sums up the gist of the work: Due to ignorance 
there seem to be two worlds, one unreal, ruled by karmic laws, and 
one real, profound, and empty like space, only accessible by waking 


182 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


up as a Buddha. Out of compassion the Buddha plays along by 
trying to awaken all beings from their ignorance. For this he 
deserves our bhakti and endless hymns of praise. Through the yoga 
of emptiness one should remove the unreal barrier of ignorance that 
separates microcosm from macrocosm!’”*--an old Aryan ideal. 


I. Lokatitastava 


1-4 (E10; T20) The Buddha is extolled for his supreme insight 
and compassion. There is no soul, only the five aggregates, and yet, 
in the ultimate sense, these aggregates are also empty, illusions. 
This is because they arise from causes. 

5-10 (E10-11; T20-21) Each of the five aggregates is shown to be 
dependent upon something else, i.e. nothing in and by itself. 

11-18 (E11; T21-22) In general, things and their characteristic 
marks are neither identical nor different. So how can one 
appropriate them and so speak of them? Nothing arises, neither 
from itself nor from anything else. A thing is not different from its 
destruction. An effect cannot arise from a cause. Phenomena are like 
illusions. 

19 (E11; T22) As such they are the products of imagination 
(parikalpa). 

20-27 (E12; T23) Again, nothing (be it permanent or not) can be 
created, neither from itself or from anything else. Everything, again, 
is dependent, i.e. empty. This eternal doctrine which has been 
preached repeatedly in the stitras of Mahayana is intended to 
liberate one from all conceptualizing. The spirit (vijfi@na) should 
become "free from marks", i.e. free from appropriating, in order to 
attain liberation. Everything is to be found in Mahayana. 

28 (E12; T24) Final transfer of merit. 


2. Niraupamyastava 


1-6 (E12-13; T24) The Buddha experiences emptiness but 


NIRAUPAMYASTAVA 183 


ind at large suffers from dogmatic views (dysti).’ But, in the 

ae ae ee is ae to "see" = know. All opposites are 

if only one does not hang onto them. ; : 

0 GAS: 25) The Buddha has not really preached anything, his 

mind (citta) is empty like space. He has compassion, but his mind 
(buddhi) does not cling to anything. ‘ 

11-24 (E13-14; T25-27) The Buddha, in fact, has or seems to 
have two bodies. The spiritual body is permanent and full of bliss 
(Siva, cf. Madhyamakakarika 25.24). It cannot really be seen. It is 
not at all like his beautiful physical body which can be seen and 
which he compassionatly displays in order to guide the three kinds 
of Buddhists: (cf. Madhyamakakarika 18.12). Without his doing 
anything, as it were, he accomplishes his liberating duty as a 
Buddha. 

25 (E14; T27) Final transfer of merit. 


3. Acintyastava 


1-4 (E14-15; T27) Out of pure compassion the inconceivable 
Buddha has, in Mahayana, preached what he himself has 
experienced, that all factors are empty. This means that they are 
dependently originated, i.e. unborn, empty like an echo, etc. 

5-7 (E15; T28) All conditioned things are relative and unreal, 

8-9 (E15; T28) and so they cannot really be born. : 

10-16 (E15-16; T28-29) Nothing really exists in and by itself, and 
therefore also not by means of something else. Even relativity 

aratantra) itself does not exist. 

. 17-18 oe T29) All factors, as said, are unborn, without an 
essential nature, like illusions. 

19-20 (E16; T29-30) The senses and their objects are unreal, 

21 (E16; T30) and it is due to ignorance that people do not know 
reality. 





Psychologically" a drsti is formed by the manifold activity of 
kalpana, viz., sankalpa, parikalpa, etc. This expanding activity, 
prapafica, can be stopped by seeing, with the help of buddhi, citta 
and vijfidna, that there is nothing--i.e. only emptiness--to be seen. 
This is but simple yoga, but in specific Mahayana terminology. 


184 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


22-24 (E16; T30) Since things are really unborn, like illusions, 
one cannot really distinguish them and say that they exist or do not 
exist. 

25-30 (E16-17; T30-31) All things, including liberation, appear 
as dreams and so they are not really dual. They are, in fact, unborn. 

31-34 (E17; T31) The Buddhas have liberated numerous beings, 
or so it seems. In reality not one has been liberated; the agent and 
his works are empty. 

35-41 (E17; T32) The entire world (the five aggregates) is but 
"names" and opinions; there is no object or subject in and by itself. 
Emptiness is an inconceivable reality that cannot be grasped. It is 
the same as the Buddha and his dharma. 

42-43 (E18'; T32-33) Indeed, the Buddha, living beings, 
everything is simply emptiness. 

44-50 (E18; T33) A distinction is to be made between the relative 
truth of affirmations and negations (as opposed to absolute non- 
reality, parikalpitasvabhava), and the absolute truth beyond 
duality.1”” 

51-58 (E18-19; T33-35) The purpose of teaching the ultimate 
truth, emptiness, is simply to heal people from their wrong belief in 
relative reality. This is appropriating. The Buddha's teaching is 
always based on two truths (satyadvaya). By means of 
prajhaparamita one eventually becomes a Buddha. 

59 (E19; T35) Final transfer of merit. 


4. Paramarthastava 


1-10 (E19-20; T35-36) The Buddha is really unborn, so he can 
only be praised--out of bhakti and based on relative lokaprajfiapti!”*- 
-in negative terms as neither this nor that. He is, e.g., neither 
permanent nor impermanent, he has no color, no size, no location 
etc. He has, however, attained "profundity" (gambhirata, cf. Rgveda 
10.129). Everything being empty, who has praised whom, and for 
what? 

11 (E20; T36) Nevertheless: a final transfer of merit, no matter 
how unreal, ultimately speaking. 





SAMADHIRAJA 185 


45. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Samadhirajasitra’”” 

This work exists in one Tibetan and three Chinese translations, 
only one of which is complete. One of the incomplete translations, 
by An Shih Kao of the later Han dynasty, is estimated by Constantin 
Regamey™™ to have been made in 148 A.D. The complete text was 
translated into Chinese by Narendraya§as in the sixth century, and 
the Tibetan translation dates from the ninth century. Nalinaksha 
Dutt infers "that the sutra in its original form was much shorter than 
the one translated by Narendrayaégas...""*! 

Complete editions of the work are found in Dutt and Vaidya.’® 
There is no complete translation into any Western language at this 
point. In footnotes accompanying the summary of each chapter 
below we indicate the availability of editions and translations of 
particular chapters. The summary provided here is a combination 
of several sources: titles taken from Gomez/Silk'®, summaries of 
chapters taken from a combination of R.L. Mitra’ ="M" and Dutt 
="D". 


Chapter I. The Setting!®® 


"Prince Candraprabha takes leave of the Buddha to ask a 
question...How would a person attain the inconceivable truth and 
realise the real nature of constituted things and...perfect himself in 
sila, dhyana and prajfid?..."(D, 2.1,xiii). "The Lord replied that a 
Bodhisattva can easily attain all these by practising..." (M, 203) 
"such concentration of mind in which one realises that all things of 
the world remain in the same state for ever."(D, 2.1,xiv). 


Chapter II. Previous Life of the Buddha as Salendraraja’®° 
Chapter III. The Virtues of a Buddha’®” 
"The merits of a Tathagata are that he is perfectly enlightened, 
learned, well-conducted, well-bestowed; that he is perfectly 


conversant with the ways of men; he is without a superior; he has 
complete control over the senses." (M, 203) 


186 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Chapter IV. Different Aspects of Samadhi and Meditation on the 
Buddha's Virtues!®* 


"The real nature of the Samadhi is that the mind, unclouded by 
ignorance, should be fixed on one point. The knowledge of restraint 
put upon by ignorance, removal of the burdens of the world, the 
control of passions, and the correction of faults,--these also are 
essential to the Samadhi." (M, 203) 


Chapter V. Story of the Former Buddha Ghosadatta 
Chapter VI. Prerequisites for Samadhi! 


"...Preparatory exercises for perfecting oneself in the highest 
meditation...are (1) development of a compassionate mind, (2) 
acquisition of merits, and (3) worship of the dharmakaya and not 
the riipakaya of the Tathagata." (D, 2.1,xvii. 


Chapter Vil. Three Patiences (ksanti) 


"By the first ksanti, a person avoids quarrels, realises the illusory 
nature of things, acquires knowledge of the scriptures...develops 
faith and takes the vow to attain the highest knowledge. By the 
second..a person becomes steadfast like the mountain, develops 
concentration of thoughts, acquires the five abhijfids, ultimately 
extends his thoughts beyond limitation. By the third...a person 
visualizes the innumerable Buddhas preaching to beings, 
comprehends the ways and manners of Buddhas, and remains 
unmoved by worldly gains or fame...He now possesses not only 
ksanti, but also maitri and karuna". (D, 2.1, xvii-xviii) 


Chapter VIII. Story of the Former Buddha Abhavasamudgata’” 
The stanzas accompanying this story contain valuable 


Philosophical material reinforcing the connection between the 
doctrine of emptiness and the practice of samadhi. 





SAMADHIRAJA 187 


191 


Chapter IX. Receptivity to the Profound Dharma 


"This chapter...offers in charming similes and sonorous verses an 
excellent exposition of the Siinyata doctrine, i.e., non-existence of 
the things of the world. It shows that things have no more existence 
than a mirage...The things of the world are compared to sky, 
fleeting clouds, sea-foam...objects seen in a dream. It tells us to 
avoid the extreme assertions like "is" or "is not", and criticises those 
Hinayanists who regard themselves as...seers of the four truths as in 
reality such acquisitions also do not exist." (D, 2.1, xviiii-xix). 


Chapter X. The Buddha Visits Candraprabha 


"When Buddha placed his footsteps on the threshold of 
Candraprabha's palace, the earth quaked and many miracles 
happened, and all beings in hells and elsewhere felt happy." (D 2.1, 
xix-xx) 


Chapter XI. Preserving the Sutra’? 


"Candraprabha...put the following questions...: By what practices 
can a Bodhisattva realise the real nature of worldly objects, be a 
performer of proper deeds, be able to remember his former births, 
possess a sangha without any dissension...The only answer given by 
Buddha...was that a Bodhisattva could obtain all knowledge if he 
would understand only that ‘all dharmas are devoid of any 
appellation or description, and are without origin or decay'." (D 2.1, 
xx) 


Chapter XII. Recounting the Virtues of the Buddha through the 
Practice of Samadhi 
The Buddha's virtues and the state of mind that is the liberating 
samadhi are the same insofar as they are both unappropriatable and 
empty. The Chapter further addresses a Bodhisattva's detachment. 


Chapter XIII. Explanation of the True Meaning of Samadhi 


The true meaning of the king of Samadhis is the experience of 
emptiness. 


188 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Chapter XIV. The Reasons for the Buddha's Smile?” 


The Budha smiled "because he foresaw that Candraprabha's 
merits and aspirations were such that he would ultimately become 
a Buddha." (D 2.1, xxii) 


Chapter XVI. Previous Existence of the Buddha as the Son of 
Matiraja’™ 


"On listening to the (Buddha's) discourse, the nature of dharma 
became apparent to him (the prince, who had fallen ill,) and his 
disease at once disappeared." (D 2.1, xxiii) 


Chapter XVII. Approaches to the Samadhi that Manifests Multiple 
Buddhas! 


"A Bodhisattva should equip himself with the following four 
acquisitions: (1) Tolerance...(2) Perfection in morality...(3) Aversion 
for worldly existence...(4) Strong faith (in himself). (D 2.2, i) 


Chapter XVIII. Transmission of the Samadhi to Candraprabha 


"Bhagavan now tells Prince Candraprabha that a Bodhisattva who 
wishes to learn and propagate this Samadhi (leading to the 
realisation of the sameness of all objects) should take to 
meditational exercises by which he will be (1) unwearied in 
acquisition of merits, (ii) unassailable by enemies, (iii) 
immeasurable in knowledge, and (iv) extremely powerful in 
eloquence..." (D 2.2, p. iv) 


Chapter XIX. Explanation of the Inconceivable Dharma of the 
Buddha! 


This Chapter deals with the impossibility of conceiving the full 
nature of Buddhas or their teachings. 


Chapter XX. Teachings of the Former Buddha Indraketu 


This is an exposition of the teachings of emptiness and the 





SAMADHIRAJA 189 
paradox of teaching and preserving the dharma in words. 
Chapter XXI. A Previous Existence 


"__.(A Bodhisattva) should believe firmly in the identity of the 
Tathagata with feelings, perception, passions and impressions. So 
that he should believe that pentaform matter is nothing but the 
Tathagata." (M 208) 


197 


Chapter XXII. Description of the Body of a Tathagata 


This Chapter discusses the Bodhisattva's detachment and the two 
bodies of a buddha, rtipakaya and dharmakaya. 


Chapter XXIII. The Inconceivability of the Tathagata 


This is an exposition on the four kinds of “penetrating 
understanding" (pratisamvid) as a key to the nature of reality and 
Buddhahood, and a discussion of their inconceivability. 


Chapter XXIV. Approaches to Penetrating Understanding 


"The material elements (riipa) are in bodhi and bodhi is in the 
material elements, the two are identical. By means of words 
Nirvana is described but in fact neither Nirvana nor the words are 
to be found in reality. The dharmas never actually come into being 
in this world; hence they remain the same whether before or after 
their so called appearance..." (D 2.2, xi) 


Chapter XXV. Rejoicing at the Merit of Others 
This Chapter concerns (1) the transfer to other beings of the 
merit of aspiration toward Buddhahood and (2) the merit of taking 


pleasure in the merit of others 


Chapter XXVI. The Value of Generosity 


190 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Chapter XXVII. Explanation of the Virtue of Morality 


"In this Chapter are enumerated the fruits of hearing and of 
practising the great Samadhi". (M 210) 


Chapter XXVIII. Ten Advantages 


A series of sets of ten fruits that accrue to the Bodhisattva who 
perfects himself in various ways is listed. 


Chapter XXIX. Explanation of the Three Hundred Terms 


"Not to perceive the purity of character, not to practice the 
Samadhi, not to inculcate knowledge, to scrutinize the doctrine of 
mukti, and to know it as the doctrine of the soul's salvation is called 
aparigraha or non-acceptance of all qualities." (M, 210) 


Chapter XXX. Merits of the Samadhi 


Chapter XXXI. Explanation of the Absence of an Essence in All 
Dharmas 


Chapter XXXII. The Value of Preserving the Siitra 


“Ananda asked the Lord why Bodhisattvas feel no pain even when 
their limbs are torn asunder. The Lord replies, as a worldly-minded 
man, every part of whose body is burning under the fire of sin, can 
feel pleasure without the fire being extinguished...so does a 
Bodhisattva who is desirous of escaping from the burning fires of 
grief, birth and decrepitude and longs to obtain nirvana, feel no 
pain from such trifling matters as the amputation of a hand or a 
foot." (M, 212) 


Chapter XXXIII. The Story of Buddha as Ksemadatta’® 


"When a Bodhisattva wishes to attain the excellent Bodhi 


knowledge he should listen to, practise, and preach the great 
Samadhi." (M, 212) 





NIRAUPAMYASTAVA 191 
Chapter XXXIV. The Story of Jiianavati'? 
Chapter XXXV. The Story of Supuspacandra 


"The three delights of moksa are--the delight afforded by the 
knowledge of Nihility, the delight afforded by the knowledge that 
things are produced without a cause, and the delight that he has to 
perform no samadhis any more." (M, 213) 


Chapter XXXVI. Explanation of the Element of Morality in the 
Path 


"The next step to be taken by a Bodhisattva is to aim at the 
purity of physical actions, and at the restraints of speech...The latter 
shows the inactivity of existence in Nihility, the illusive nature of all 
things created, and that annihilation is the only truth. 


Chapter XXXVII. Previous Life of Sakyamuni as YaSahprabha 


"The restraint of mind...shows that the mind is unreal like a 
dream, an illusion, a mirage. From it men become fearless, worship 
Buddha, and learn a samadhi named Jvalantarabha." (M, 214) 


Chapter XXXVIII. The True Meaning of Restraint of Body, Speech 
and Mind 


"Let those who seek perfection quickly listen to Buddha's 
instructions on mental restraint. By perfection in mental restraint 
a person obtains the inconceivable dharmas attainable by the Jinas, 
mental emancipation, and other attainments...He gets rid of wrong 
views, deceitfulness towards the elders, attachment, delusion and all 
other evils. He easily comprehends impermanence, non- 
substantiality, soullessness, causal origin of objects, which, in fact, 
neither appear nor disappear. The real mental restraint consists in 
not forming any conception about phenomenal objects and even 
about the highest truth or Nirvana." (D 3, xxvi) 


192 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Chapter XXXIX. Explanation of the Three Hundred Terms 


"This chapter deals with the concepts enumerated...in a 
catechetical method in the style of the Pali Abhidhammapitaka. It 
opens, e.g., with the question ‘what is purity in deeds?’ The answer 
given is that 'it produces non-attachment to the three worlds, which 
have no more existence than that of a dream." (D 3, xxvi) 


Chapter XL. Transmission 


"This is the concluding chapter eulogizing the present text and 
adducing reasons for describing it as a Vaipulyasiitra." (D 3, xxvii) 


46. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, VimalakirtinirdeSasiitra.2 
Summary by A. K. Warder 


*°!"The hero of the present Sutra, the bodhisattva Vimalakirti...is 
a Licchavi householder in Vaisali in the time of the Buddha, living 
very much in the world, even to the extent of visiting the geisha 
girls, taverns and casinos and indulging in all the pleasures of life. 
However, he is in reality a model bodhisattva, even a sramana 
(ascetic-philosopher), and mixes with worldly people in order to 
show them the disadvantages of pursuing pleasure. He is 
universally respected and his conversation is in conformity with his 
doctrine as well as skilful, so that his activities in the world serve to 
ripen people's understanding and draw them away from attachment 
to pleasures." 

"One day Vimalakirti gives out that he is ill, though this is only 
another expedient. According to Indian custom many people go to 
visit him and inquire whether he is feeling better, to which inquiry 
he replies with discourses on the impermanence, unhappiness, etc., 
of the elements of which the body is composed and the diseases to 
which it is subject. Naturally, when the Buddha...knows of 
Vimalakirti's illness he wishes to send a monk to visit the sick 
man...In turn he asks Sariputra, Maudgalyayana, Subhiiti, Ananda 
and many others to go. All refuse, on the ground that they are 
incapable of holding conversation with Vimalakirti, having been 
humiliated by him on some previous occasion, when they were each 


VIMALAKIRTINIRDESA 193 


reduced to silence. For example the bodhisattva Maitreya had been 
told by the Buddha that he will be the next buddha, after one more 
birth. Vimalakirti found him discussing the stage he had reached 
with the Tusita gods and took him up on this question of ‘birth’: it 
is only by non-birth that one can reach this stage, Maitreya's 
thusness is only the thusness of all phenomena, there is no duality 
between him and all other living beings, so that when he becomes 
enlightened all beings will become enlightened; anyway, all beings 
are extinct already, this is their thusness, so Maitreya ought not to 
deceive the gods with this talk about his going to attain 
enlightenment. Maitreya could think of nothing to say to this on 
that occasion and declares himself now incapable of asking 
Vimalakirti about his illness." 

"At last the bodhisattva Maiijusri agrees to go, though the task is 
difficult. Many monks, bodhisattvas and gods go with him to hear 
what promises to be a remarkable conversation. They find the house 
appropriately empty and Vimalakirti tells Mafijuéri he is well-come, 
especially as he has not come...As to his illness, it will last as long 
as living beings are ignorant and desire existence. Starting thus, the 
conversation and the episodes which follow express in narrative and 
dramatic form the main teaching of the Madhyamaka. Sariputra 
plays the part of the clown who asks foolish questions (i.e., at the 
concealing level), complaining that there are no seats for the 
visitors, not enough food for them, etc. The house-goddess of 
Vimalakirti's house makes game of him with displays of magic. 
Seeing that she has made such progress on the way Sariputra is 
foolish enough to ask her why she does not change her female sex 
(traditionally regarded as a disadvantage, at least by monks), 
evidently having the power to do so. The goddess replies that so far 
she has not been able to discover what this ‘female sex' is: like all 
phenomena it is only an artifice or illusion (maya), it is not real (is 
nothing in itself), so there isn't anything to change. However she 
punishes Sariputra for his suggestion, making a woman of him by 
her magic: he finds he has the body of the goddess whilst she 
appears like the elder Sariputra and asks him why he does not 
change his 'female sex.' She restores him after a sufficient lecture, 
adding that ultimately no changes take place." 

"Vimalakirti explains to Maifijusri how a bodhisattva lives in the 
world without being attached to it, conforming to passion and 


194 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


aversion, though being free from these, and to delusion though he 
has understanding. He asks Majijuéri to tell him what the ‘clan of 
the thus-gone' is--a new concept...This ‘clan’, says Maiijusn, is that 
of ignorance, desire for existence, passion, averson, delusion, error, 
the obstacles, etc., in other words of all bad phenomena which lead 
to transmigration. Asked what this signifies he explains that the 
thought of enlightenment can occur only in transmigration (among 
synthesized phenomena), as lotuses grow only in the mud." 


47. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Salistambasiitra 
Summary by Karl H. Potter 


Noble Ross Reat,22 who has made a life's work out of the study 
of this text, believes it may be the earliest Mahayana sutra. 
However, its earliest known translation dates from the fourth 
century, though a closely related work was translated by Ji Zhan in 
220-252 (T.708). Although commentaries ascribed to "Nagarjuna" 
are available in three Tibetan versions (P.5466, 5485-5486) it is 
fairly clear none are by the Nagarjuna we just finished reviewing. 
Nevertheless, it cannot be doubted that the work is a rather early 
one. Reat ascribes to it Mahayana leanings on the grounds that the 
text argues "that enlightenment represents a realization of Dharma- 
kaya Buddha", but admits that the language and style is 
reminiscent of Theravada. 

Reat's text is necessarily a combination of several sources, but he 
manages to reconstruct about 90% of the Sanskrit text on the basis 
of quotations found elsewhere in the literature. He also provides a 
Tibetan text and an English translation, referred to below as "ET". 

In addition to ET Jeffrey D. Schoening has recently edited and 
translated this work with its commentaries in two volumes as 
Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde, Heft 35.1, 
Wien 1995. 


1-6 (ET26-31) Maitreya advises Sariputra on dependent 
origination, the nature of dharma, and why it is that on seeing 
dependent origination one sees dharma and sees the Buddha. 

The twelve-fold chain of dependent origination is stated. Each 


SALISTAMBA 195 


member is the cause of the next, and the cessation of a member is 
the cause of the cessation of its preceding member. 

Dharma is defined as the noble eight-fold path (its members 
listed). And the Buddha is one who understands all factors, who has 
the wisdom-eye and whose body is all factors, who sees the factors 
of both the disciple and the adept. 

7-14 (ET32-39) Understanding dependent origination is to 
understand dharma, and one understanding dharma sees the 
unsurpassable body of factors of the Buddha. Why is it called 
"dependent origination"? Because it arises from causes and 
conditions. Whether or not Tathagatas arise, or questions are asked 
etc., the nature of factors (dharmata), suchness, reality, truth are 
constant. (This theme is echoed throughout the remainder of the 
text.) 

What are the causes? As, e.g., a sprout only arises when there is 
a seed, and a seed only from a sprout, but neither seed nor sprout 
are aware of their connection. 

What are the conditions? They are six: earth, water, fire, wind 
space and season (tu). Each has its specific function--earth to 
support, water to moisten, heat to mature, wind to bring out space 
to provide room, and season to transform the seed. When all 
function a sprout is developed. 

15-20 (ET40-42) External dependent origination can be 
understood as five ways of being a cause: as nonpersisting, as not 
nonpersistng, as nontransmigratory, as producing a large result 
from a small cause, and being bound by similarity. The seed is not 
the sprout, and when one ceases the other arises. Thus the cause is 
nonpersisting. But the seed does not arise from the cessation of the 
sprout, nor vice versa; rather, the sprout arises just as the seed 
ceases; thus the cause is not nonpersisting. Since seed and sprout 
are dissimilar, the cause is not transmigratory. A sprout is many 

oe larger than a seed. And the effect is of a similar kind to its 
a enneee using Internal dependent origination can be 
penis as she ways of being causal: causal qua cause and 
soni : o ition. Each member of the twelvefold chain is a 
ie or the arising of the next: this is being causal qua cause. 

all of the six conditioning elements mentioned above must come 
together if a result is to occur: this is being causal qua condition. 


196 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Thus, the earth element produces a body's solidity, the water 
element its cohesion, the fire element its ability to consume, the 
wind element its ability to breathe, the space element the 
hollowness inside its body. That which causes the psychophysical 
complex to develop is called its "consciousness-element" 
(vijfianadhdtu) associated with the contaminating combination of 
five consciousnesses plus mental consciousness. Without these 
conditions there is no embodiment. None of these elements 
constitute a self, person or ego, nor is what is spoken of male or 
female or neuter. 

27-30 (ET49-57) That ignorance which consists in perceiving 
these six conditioning elements as one self spawns the traces of 
greed, hatred and delusion concerning sense-contents. Consciousness 
consists in the manifestation of objects. The four appropriating, 
nonmaterial aggregates that arise with consciousness are termed 
"name", and this, together with the four great elements and derived 
matter ("form"), constitutes the psychophysical complex. The sense- 
organs connected with the psychophysical complex comprise the six 
sense-bases. Contact is the connection of three (viz., organ, object 
and visual awareness). Experiencing contact is feeling. Clinging to 
feeling is appropriating. Action (karman) deriving from 
appropriating and producing rebirth is existing. The manifestation 
of the aggregates caused by existing is birth, the maturing of the 
aggregates one is born with is decay, the destruction of worn out 
aggregates is death. A dying person's internal burning is sorrow, and 
expressing sorrow is lamentation. Experiencing unpleasantness 
associated with the five consciousness-bodies is frustration. Mental 
frustration is depression. And the afflictions associated with these 
constitute irritation. (The twelvefold chain is rehearsed twice more 
in different terminology in 28-29). 

31-38 (ET58-66 ) In this flowing stream of dependent origination 
four limbs (aga) are responsible for assembling things in 
appropriate order. These four are ignorance, craving, karma and 
consciousness. Consciousness causes by being a seed; karmic 
defilements cause the seed to be born and function as the field of 
consciousness; cravings water the consciousness-seed, and ignorance 
scatters it. Without them the development of the consciousness-seed 
doesn't occur. Here and there a consciousness-seed causes a sprout, 
a psychophysical complex, to arise through rebirth in a mother's 


SALISTAMBA 197 


womb. 

Here visual consciousness arises from five causal factors: the eye, 
the object (color/shape: riipa), light, space and attention. 

But nothing transmigrates from this world to another world. 
There is only the appearance of karmic fruits. It is like the reflection 
of a face in a mirror: no face transmigrates into the mirror, but 
because of causes and conditions there is the appearance of a face, 
as there is only the appearance of the results of karmic actions. So 
nothing departs from this world or is reborn in another. 

39-44 (ET67-70) Internal dependent origination can be 
understood in five ways: as nonpersisting, as persisting, as 
nontransmigratory, as producing a large result from a small cause, 
as being bound by similarity. It is nonpersisting, since the aggregates 
at death are one thing, the aggregates at arising another. It is not 
nonpersisting, since the new aggregates arise just as the old ones 
cease. It is nontransmigratory, since beings of heterogeneous forces 
within one lifetime arise with homogeneous forces in the next. 
Because a small deed may bear a large fruit, a large result can come 
from a small cause. And because the results of an action are similar 
in feeling to their causes, the effect is similar to its cause. 

45-48 (ET70-74) One who correctly (spelled out at length) 
understands dependent origination, who cuts off at their roots all 
dogmatic views concerning self, person, etc., it is said by the 
Buddha that he will attain superior enlightenment. 


ARYADEVA 


Tom Tillemans has given the most recent assessment of the life 
and works of this author.”°> Summarizing briefly, it seems likely that 
Aryadeva was born in Lanka, which appears to have meant modern 
Sri Lanka, although this has been questioned. It is clear he 
studied with Nagarjuna. He is to be distinguished from another 
Aryadeva who wrote commentaries on the Guhyasamdjatantra and 
the Cittavisuddhiprakarana. That author, who must have lived 
several centuries later, may have also authored two other works 
attributed to an Aryadeva by the Tibetan sources, viz. the 


Se eeratnennar une aides and the Madhyamakabhrama- 
ghata. 


198 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
48. ARYADEVA, Catuhéataka.” 
Summarized by Karen Lang 
"ET" references are to the Lang edition and translation just cited. 
Chapter One: Rejecting Belief in Permanence 


1-9 (ET26-29) Aryadeva first attacks the perverted view of 
noneternal things as eternal. In this chapter he uses human beings 
to illustrate the thesis that whatever comes into being must cease. 
There is no one who is born who does not proceed inevitably 
towards death. One should fear death because, unlike the 
symptoms of illness and old age, it cannot be treated. Though the 
time of death is uncertain, it will come. He suggests ironically that 
someone who engages in evil actions without fear of the 
consequences must have abandoned all attachment to himself. 

10 (ET28-29) What is called "life" is nothing but a moment of 

consciousness; since ordinary people do not understand this fact, 
self-knowledge is rare. 
‘ 12-22 (E28-31) It is wrong to grieve over others' deaths and 
ignore one's own impending death. Attachment to others makes 
even rebirth in heaven unlikely. If the bonds of affection were 
permanent, the pain of separation from loved ones should never be 
alleviated, which is contrary to experience. Compliance with 
society's customs for mourning the dead is hypocritical and 
ineffective in relieving pain. 

23-25 (ET32-33) Householders are advised not to delay leaving 
home, since death makes Separation inevitable. Someone who 


forsakes all a achment to o ers and reflects o 
I att: t th d reflects on his own death will 


Chapter Two: Rejecting Belief in Pleasure 


1-18 (ET32-37) Aryadeva examines the second erroneous 
conception, namely, that things actually characterized by frustration 
are satisfying in regard to the human body. Although the body 
should be taken care of so that merit may accumulate over a long 
life, it is wrong to value it, because it is a source of frustration. 


CATUHSATAKA 199 


Frustration is the essential nature of the body. Two types of 
frustrations--mental and physical--daily afflict people. Satisfaction 
depends upon one's own conceptual constructions, and since 
frustration easily overcomes these conceptions of satisfaction, 
frustration has superior power. Various external causes and internal 
conditions establish the body as a source of frustration. The body 
experiences the physical pain of exertion, cold, hunger, disease, and 
dying. Frustration, moreover, is inherent in the very nature of the 
body since even the four elements which compose it cause 
frustration because they are constantly in a state of conflict. 

19 (ET36-37) One should avoid evil in this world and the next 
because it is wrong to think that a bad rebirth is pleasurable. 

20-24 (ET36-39) The body experiences frustration when initially 
pleasurable sensations change and become frustrating. Ordinary 
people mistakenly believe that relieving pain is satisfying, but no 
pleasure can overcome frustration. 

25 (ET38-39) Everything that is impermanent must also be 
considered frustrating. 


Chapter Three: Rejecting Belief in Purity 


1-16 (ET38-43) The human body illustrates also the third 
erroneous conception of impure things being pure. The insatiable 
craving for sense pleasures is the basis for attachment to women. 
This attachment which others--even dogs--share is impermanent and 
productive of frustration, not satisfaction. Rational people turn their 
minds away from sensual pleasures; fools suffer jealousy and endure 
abuse from women because of their blind passion. 

17-25 (ET42-45) The human body is impure since it harbors filth, 
and no one should be proud of it or attached to it. Neither bathing 
nor wearing flower garlands can remedy this impurity. But 
meditation on the body's impurity can produce non-attachment. 
Impermanence, impurity, pain, and the absence of a self are all seen 
in the human body. 

Chapter Four: Rejecting Egotism?* 

1-17 (ET46-51) Aryadeva analyzes the last of the four erroneous 

conceptions, the mistaken belief in a real and substantial self when 


200 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


there is no such self, in relation to ordinary people's concepts of "I" 
and "mine" His remarks addressed to an unnamed Indian king 
criticize his pride in thinking "I am a generous donor" and "I am the 
protector of my people". Aryadeva points out that the wealth the 
king donates comes from the labor of his subjects and is not really 
his. The people also must protect him by their support if his reign 
is to continue. Moreover, in protecting them he engages in merciless 
and evil actions, e.g., the punishment of criminals and war. 

18-25 (ET50-53) The king's position as a sovereign is useless in 
achieving liberation. Past merit accounts for his present birth in a 
high position but his future birth is in danger because of his 
merciless actions. 


Chapter Five: The Acts of a Bodhisattva 


1-3 (ET52-55) In this chapter on the Bodhisattva's career, 
Aryadeva emphasizes that Buddhas and Bodhisattvas work actively 
for the benefit of all beings. Buddhas direct all their actions 
towards benefitting others; their power over actions indicates 
omniscience. 

4-7 (ETS4-57) The intention behind an action determines its 
merit. Because of the Bodhisattvas' intentions (samkalpa) and their 
control over mind, all their actions are good, even those considered 
foul when undertaken by others. The merit of a Bodhisattva's 
intention far exceeds the merit that would make all people on earth 
universal monarchs (cakravartin). The merit of training someone to 
produce the intention of enlightenment even exceeds that of 
building a stipa. 

8-16 (ET56-59) Bodhisattvas must use both skillful methods and 
compassion in diagnosing and treating their students’ defilements. 
Others blame them if uninstructed beings go to a bad rebirth. 
People indifferent or hostile to the Bodhisattvas' teachings will incur 
bad rebirths. 

17-23 (ET58-63) Bodhisattvas may be reborn voluntarily in 
inferior births, although their control over mind enables them to be 
reborn continuously as kings. Because of their control over mind, 
no harm comes to them even in this world; consequently there is no 
difference to them between Samsara and nirvana. Bodhisattvas 
Practise generosity without regard to any reward. The merit they 





CATUHSATAKA 201 


derive from skillful methods is immeasurable; this vast quantity of 
accumulated good karma renders negligible any past nonvirtuous 
action and makes their actions in benefitting others successful. 

24-25 (ET62-63) The tathdgata's power is inconceivable, but 
some people fear the teaching of marvels (adbhutadharma), just as 
fools fear the profound teaching. 


Chapter Six: Rejecting the Defilements 


1-7 (ET62-65) Each of the three defilements--delusion, 
attachment and hatred--causes frustration and harms people. A 
skillful teacher identifies which defilement most affects a student 
and then applies the proper antidote: harsh treatment to counteract 
attachment and kind treatment to counteract hatred. 

8-9 (ET64-65) The defilements arise either from internal causes, 
e.g., habitual inclinations or proclivities (anusaya), or from external 
conditions, e.g., a bad friend. Defilements that arise from external 
conditions are easy to suppress; the others are not. 

10-11 (ET66-67) The elimination of delusion eliminates 
attachment and hatred since it is their basis. Understanding 
dependent origination eliminates delusion. 

12-24 (ET66-69) The characteristics of people afflicted by 
attachment and hatred and the appropriate countermeasures for 
these defilements are discussed. 

25 (ET68-69) The defilements will cease once the duration, etc., 
of consciousness is understood. 


Chapter Seven: Rejecting Attachment to Sensual Pleasures?” 


1-8 (ET70-73) Rebirth in samsara is never voluntary; bondage in 
this ocean of suffering should be feared. Most people hold the 
wrong views and proceed to a bad rebirth. Because the maturation 
of evil is harmful, an intelligent person directs his mind towards the 
exhaustion of all karma. 

10-12 (ET72-73) The initial cause of an effect is never seen. Not 
every effect is necessarily attained, but every completed result is 
destroyed effortlessly. 

13-23 (ET72-77) The wise fear rebirth in heaven--which is rare-- 
as much as hell. It is wrong to turn away from mundane objects in 


202 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the expectation of enjoying divine objects. Even though they are 
acquired through merit, the most desirable sense objects and 
sovereign power are best repudiated since they are impermanent. 

24 (ET78-79) People who see the world as being composed of 
collections of machines (yantra) and illusory beings (mayapurusa) 
attain the highest state. 


Chapter Eight: The Condutt of a Student?” 


1-3 (ET78-79) The arising of attachment and the other 
defilements is not based upon a real object, for a real object would 
produce the same response in all observers. The existence of 
attachment, etc., depends upon conceptual constructions. 

5-7 (ET80-81) Skeptical analysis (samdeha), by focussing 
attention on this teaching (of emptiness), can lead to the destruction 
of samsadra. But nirvana cannot be attained through the wrong 
apprehension of emptiness. It is wrong to regard something that is 
not empty as empty because of a selfish desire to attain nirvana. 

8-11 (ET80-83) Worldly teaching involves activity: the ultimate 
teaching involves a withdrawal from activity; nirvana is for those 
who are inactive and rebirth is for those who are active. People 
partial to their own theses who criticize others will not attain 
nirvana, since tranquillity does not result from divisive quarrels. 

12-13 (ET82-83) The desire for continued existence in this world 
and the desire for death because of overwhelming pain are both 
criticized as not leading to nirvana. 

14-15 (ET82-83) Tathagatas proclaim a gradual teaching: giving 
is recommended to people of low ability; moral behavior to people 
of middling ability; and the cultivation of tranquillity to people of 
the highest ability. First the rejection of demeritorious actions must 
be understood; next, the rejection of the self; and finally the 
rejection of all things, e.g., the aggregates, the sense bases, and the 
elements. 

16 (ET82-83) The emptiness of one thing is precisely the 
emptiness of all. 

17 (ET84-85) Attachment to dharma is only for those who seek 
heaven, not for those who seek liberation. 

18-20 (ET84-85) Instruction should conform to the students’ 
abilities, just as a physician prescribes medicine in accordance with 





CATUHSATAKA 203 


the illness. Emptiness should not be taught to everyone, since 
unsuitable medicine becomes poison. The medicine, viz., the 
catuskoti method of analysis, should be applied in accordance with 
the illness. It is impossible to teach worldly people the truth 
without referring first to the existence of worldly things. 

21-22 (ET84-87} A good rebirth is acquired through a partial 
understanding of the truth; the highest state through a complete 
understanding. Intelligent people, therefore, constantly direct their 
minds towards inner contemplation (adhyatmacinta). If someone 
who understands the truth does not attain nirvana in this life, he 
will attain it in the next life, in accordance with his karma. 

23-25 (ET86-87) Nirvana is not absent in this world, but people 
who are suitably disciplined and liberated are rare. Contemplation 
of the body's lack of virtuous qualities stops desire. Rebirth ceases 
after its cause, the afflictions and karma, cease. 


Chapter Nine: The Refutation of Permanent Things?” 


1-4 (ET88-89) Experience indicates that no existent things arise 
independently of causes; all are effects. If created things are not 
permanent and uncreated things are permanent, it should follow 
that if created things exist, permanent things do not exist. 

5 (ET88-89) Even ordinary people do not conceive of akaga as a 
permanent thing. 

6 (ET88-89) One spatial part does not cover the whole space; 
therefore it must have other spatial parts. Whatever has parts is 
created and not permanent. 

7 (ET90-91) Time undergoes change because we see both activity 
and inactivity in relation to it. Because it depends on something 
else, it must be an effect and not permanent. 

8-9 (ET90-91) Cause and effect are mutually established, for 
without the existence of an effect nothing can be called a cause. A 
cause undergoes change in becoming a cause, and nothing that 
undergoes change can be permanent. 

10 (ET90-91) A thing whose cause is something permanent 
produces itself after having been nonexistent. A cause of a thing that 
has been produced by itself serves no purpose. 

11 (ET90-91) Since cause and effect never have dissimilar 
characteristics, a permanent cause should never result in an 


204 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


impermanent effect. 

12 (ET90-91) An atom that has one part that is a cause and 
another that is not is a composite thing, and it is not possible for a 
composite thing to be permanent. 

13-17 (ET90-93) Because the "atomic" size (parimandalya) of the 
cause is not present in the effect, it is impossible that atoms are in 
contact in their entirety. Moreover, because the locus of one atom 
cannot be that of another, the cause and the effect cannot be equal 
in dimension. But if there were partial contact, e.g., the eastern 
side of one atom touching the western side of another, atoms would 
have parts. Moreover, if an atom has no parts, it cannot move, 
since no front part will move forward. No one can see it if it has no 
front, middle, and rear parts. 

18 (ET92-93) Either the effect destroys its cause and its cause, 
e.g., the atom, is not permanent or the cause remains and its effect 
is not found. 

19 (ET92-93) No permanent thing has resistance. 

20-23 (ET92-95)"? Aryadeva criticizes Buddhists who believe in 
a permanent state of liberation. Liberation is not something 
different from bondage, the thing bound and the method of 
liberation; nor is it something permanent in which the aggregates 
or the personality (pudgala) exist. He rejects also the Samkhya 
belief that a conscious or potentially conscious self exists in 
liberation. 

24-25 (ET94-95) Belief in a self may have some value on a 
worldly level, but those who seek liberation should reject it, since 
it does not exist on an ultimate level. 


Chapter Ten: Refutation of the Self?!* 


1-2 (ET94-95) The conviction "I am male" is based on ignorance, 
since neither the inner self (antaratman) nor the elements are male, 
female, or neuter. 

3-4 (ET94-95) The concept of a self is based on impermanent 
things. The self, like the body, changes from one birth to another. 
Consequently, the opponent should not claim that the self is 
different from the body and permanent. 

5S (ET96-97) The self is not the agent of the body's actions, 
because motion does not arise from something that is intangible. 


CATUHSATAKA 205 


6 (ET96-97) Since no harm should come to a permanent self, 
there should be on that view no need to protect oneself by doing 
virtuous actions! 

7 (ET96-97) The opponent assumes that the self is the 
substratum for the memory of past lives and that the self bears the 
impressions of past births from one life to the next. Aryadeva 
replies that one might assume also that the body bears the 
impressions of past scars from one life to the next and reach the 
absurd conclusion that the body is permanent! 

8-9 (ET96-97) If the self (jiva), as the Nyaya-Vaisesikas claim, 
becomes connected with such qualities as awareness and 
satisfaction, it undergoes change and is not permanent. 

10-12 (ET98-99) If consciousness (caitanya) is a permanent 
attribute of the self, as the Samkhya opponent claims, the sense 
organ (karana) serves no purpose. If the self is potentially 
conscious at one moment and actually conscious at another, it 
undergoes change and is not permanent. 

13-14 (ET98-99) If consciousness were minute and the self vast 
in size, this disparity would make it difficult for such a small 
amount of consciousness to make the self conscious and 
unconsciousness would characterize the selfs essential nature. 
Moreover, if the self were all-pervasive, the term "I" should 
designate both oneself and somebody else! 

15-16 (ET98-101) The Samkhya thesis that the three unconscious 
gunas construct the world but that the conscious self experiences 
the results is irrational. 

17 (ET100-101) The connection between the self and action is 
criticized: something that is permanent and all-pervasive does not 
possess action, and without the ability to instigate action one may 
as well say that the self does not exist. 

18 (ET100-101) Some speculate that the self is vast, some that 
it is the size of a person's body, and others that it is minute; but the 
wise know that it doesn't exist. 

19-21 (ET100-101) Since a permanent self cannot experience the 
pain that motivates people to seek liberation, belief in the existence 
of a self is incompatible with nirvana. 

22-25 (ET102-103) Impermanent things are never annihilated, 
since impermanent seeds produce impermanent sprouts. There is no 
annihilation because things continue, and there is no permanence 


206 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


because things cease. 
Chapter Eleven: Refutation of Time?"* 


1 (ET102-103) Aryadeva argues against the concept of time as 
permanent through an examination of the existence of past, present 
and future. He first considers various Abhidharmika theses. 

Buddhadeva's objection: The past and the present are called 
"past" and "present" in relation to the future. 

Answer: If past and present pots are related to the future pot, 
they should exist in the future. But if past and present are also the 
future, there is no distinguishable future. 

4-8 (ET102-105) The Sarvastivada claim that past, present and 
future exist is said to imply that a thing exists at all times, which 
contradicts the tenet that things are impermanent. Past, present and 
future time are conceived in relation to things which arise, endure 
and cease. The change that these things undergo indicates that they 
are not permanent; similarly, time is not permanent. . 

9-13 (ET104-107) The existence of a thing before it is produced 
supports the eternalist thesis that things have a predetermined and 
unalterable nature. Against the Samkhya thesis of a pre-existent 
effect (satkdrya), Aryadeva argues that it is illogical that something 
should already exist and yet be referred to as something whose 
coming into existence is produced. For example, if virtuous 
behavior were innate, self-restraint would be unnecessary. But if 
any action is required, a pre-existent effect is not possible. 
Moreover, a thing that exists both before and after its production 
must be permanent, and experience shows that things begin and 
end. He criticizes the Nyaya-Vaisesika thesis that the effect is 
nonexistent before its production (asatkarya) because then cause 
and effect would be unrelated. 

16 (ET106-107) The Samkhya conception of time based on the 
transformation of things is rejected because the mind (manas) 
cannot perceive this transformation. 

18 (ET108-109) One awareness cannot apprehend two objects; 
two awarenesses cannot apprehend one object. 

19-24 (ET108-109) Impermanence and duration cannot at the 


same time mark a thing nor is it possible to establish how they 
succeed one another. 





CATUHSATAKA ay 


25 (ET108-109) Memory is false because both the object 
cognized and the cognition are past and will not arise again. 


Chapter Twelve: The Refutation of Speculative Views?" 


1-4 (ET110-111) Most people lack the impartiality, intelligence, 
and industriousness. needed to understand the Buddhist view of 
samsara and nirvana. The Buddha taught about the cycle of 
existence and the means of renouncing it, as well as tranquillity and 
the means of cultivating it. Hypocritical philosophers (pasanda) 
advocate renunciation but reject Buddhist teachings; these teachings 
alone proclaim the right method of renunciation, which leads to 

ty. 
Se roi) People confident of the Buddha's teaching on 
emptiness will gain confidence in his teaching on things that are not 
irectly perceptible. 
. 6.10 TET112-113) People fear the profound teaching because 
they are unintelligent, unaccustomed to it, or misled by other 
teachers. : 

11 (ET112-113) One loses less by rejecting moral behavior than 
by rejecting the right view of selflessness since moral conduct leads 
to rebirth in heaven but the right view leads to nirvana. 

12 (ET114-115) For some less intelligent people, teaching about 
the ego is better than teaching about selflessness, since motivated 
by concern for themselves they will avoid bad rebirths. But 
intelligent people who understand the teaching of selflessness 
proceed to the tranquility of nirvana. sa 

13-17 (ET114-115) Selflessness is the sole gateway to tranquillity, 
the sphere (visaya) of all the Buddhas, and terrifying to those who 
hold wrong views. Even though the Buddhas did not proclaim this 
teaching for the sake of argumentation, it terrifies opponents 
because it destroys their teachings just like fire destroys fuel. For 
those partial to other teachings, it becomes the door to their 
destruction. 

18-22 (ET116-117) The Buddha's teachings are more subtle than 
those of the brahmins and naked ascetics, because ears apprehend 
the brahmins' recitation of scriptures, eyes apprehend how the 
ascetics torment their bodies, but mind apprehends Buddhist 

teachings. Moreover, the brahmins' religious practices are just an 


208 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


outward show and the ascetics’ practices are mere stupidity! Though 
one might respect the brahmins' knowledge and pity the ascetics’ 
pain, neither religious practice constitutes a valid norm (dharma) 
because both brahmin birth and the pain ascetics experience is the 
result of past karma. 

23 (ET116-117) The Buddha's teaching is twofold: nonviolence 
constitutes dharma, and nirvana is emptiness. 

24-25 (ET116-117) People's partiality to their theses and their 
distress at defeat is criticized; an opponent's good arguments should 
be accepted. 


Chapter Thireen: Refutation of Sense Faculties and Their 
Objects?'® 


1-4 (ET118-119) Aryadeva denies that the pot is directly 
perceptible because the entire pot is not perceived when just a part 
of the pot, e.g., its color, is perceived. The entire color also cannot 
be perceived because it has inner, outer, and middle parts. 

5 (ET118-119) Matter can be broken down into its constituent 
parts but atoms also have parts. Since the atom itself still needs to 
be established, it cannot establish anything else without incurring 
the logical fallacy of question-begging (sddhyasama). 

6 (ET118-119) If a thing can be both a part and a whole, it 
would follow that the syllable (aksara), which makes up part of a 
statement, should convey the entire sense of that statement. 

7 (ET120-121) Matter is twofold: shape (samsthana) and color 
(varna). If shape and color are different, the visual organ, which 
apprehends the color, will be unable to perceive the shape. But if 
shape and color are not different, the tactile organ should be able 
to apprehend both shape and color. 

8-9 (ET120-121) Earth and the other three elements cannot be 
apprehended apart from the matter derived from them, yet the 
visual sense faculty cannot perceive both the earth element and 
matter. Since the tactile organ apprehends earth's hardness, earth 
is just an object of touch. 

10 (ET120-121) Since the quality color as a condition for the 
pot's perceptibility hasn't been established, the universal 
"perceptibility" doesn't exist. 

11 (ET120-121) The eye and the ear are both derived matter but 


CATUHSATAKA 209 


they have separate functions. The eye sees; the ear doesn't. 

12 (ET120-121) When the conditions that produce an awareness 
are incomplete, the awareness cannot precede perception. But if the 
awareness comes after the perception, it has no object. The 
awareness and perception are not simultaneous either. 

13 (ET120-121) If the eye moves towards its object, it would take 
longer to perceive things at a distance than up close. 

14 (ET122-123) If the eye moved after the visible object had 
been perceived, there would be no point in its having moved. 

15 (ET122-123) If the eye perceives its object without moving 
towards it, nothing should be beyond its range; and there would be 
no reason to distinguish between things that are close by and things 
at a distance. 

16 (ET122-123) Objection: The essential nature of things must 
be seen first in the things themselves. 

Answer: Why doesn't the eye see itself? 

17 (ET122-123) The perception of color/form/matter is 
questioned because the eye does not possess consciousness, 
consciousness does not possess perception, and color/form/matter 
does not possess either one. 

18 (ET122-123) If the sound which makes the noise reaches the 
ear, why shouldn't it be considered the speaker? But if the sound, 
without making a noise, reaches the ear, why should confidence be 
placed in it? 

19 (ET122-123) If the entire sound is heard after it reaches the 
ear, the beginning of the sound cannot be heard. But if the entire 
sound does not reach the ear, the entire sound cannot be heard. 

20 (ET124-125) Sound cannot be called sound until it is heard; 
nor can something that is not sound be called sound. 

21 (ET124-125) Perception does not result from contact between 
mind and object. After mind has come into contact with an object, 
it cannot act, since it has been separated from the other five sense 
faculties. Moreover, every time mind goes out to contact an object, 
the self must be left without a mind. 

22-23 (ET124-125) Because the visual sense faculty first perceives 
the object which mind apprehends, this object, which is no longer 
present, seems like a mirage. Because the mental faculty arises in 
dependence on the five sense faculties and their objects, it has no 
real existence of its own and is like an illusion. 


210 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


25 (ET124-125) The cycle of existence is compared to such 
insubstantial things as a firebrand's circle, a magical creation, a 
dream, an illusion, the moon reflected in water, vapor, an echo, a 
mirage, and a cloud. 


Chapter Fourteen: Refutation of Belief in Extreme Views?” 


1 (ET126-127) A thing that is not dependent upon something 
else does not exist anywhere. 

2 (ET126-127) The pot and its color are neither identical nor 
different; nor is the color located in the pot or vice versa. 

3 (ET126-127) Nyaya-Vaisesika objection: Because of a difference 
in mark, the (substance) pot is different from (the universal) 
existence (bhava). 

Answer: No. It would follow that existence is different from the 
pot and the pot would be nonexistent. 

4 (ET126-1270) If the pot is not one in number naturally, it 
cannot become one. Since there is no connection between 
dissimilar things, the (substance) pot is not connected with (the 
quality, viz. number)) one. 

5 (ET126-127) When the substance possesses large size, its color 
should possess it also. But this contradicts the Nyaya-Vaisesika tenet 
that qualities cannot possess other qualities. One's own doctrine can 
be asserted only if the opponent is not from a different school. 

6 (ET128-129) The mark cannot establish the marked thing, and 
the marked thing cannot exist independently of its marks. 

7 (ET128-129) It is impossible to predicate unity for the pot 
because it cannot be separated from its multiple marks; nor can 
there be multiple pots since pot is absent in each mark.. 

8 (ET128-129) The pot cannot be a combination of its constituent 
material qualities. There can be no connection between the tangible 
pot and the intangible color. 

9 (ET128-129) Since the color is a part of the pot, it cannot be 
the pot as a whole. Since there is no whole, there is no part either. 

10 (ET128-129) If all material qualities have the same 
indistinguishable property of being material, why should the pot- 
Status apply only to one and not the others? 

11 (ET128-129) Objection: Color is different from other material 
qualities such as taste but not from the pot. 


CATUHSATAKA 211 


Answer: Since the pot cannot exist independently of these 
material qualities, it also must be different from the color. 

12 (ET130-131) Objection: The pot has no cause. 

Answer: An effect cannot produce itself; for this reason, the pot 
does not exist independently of its material qualities. 

13 (ET130-131) Objection: The pot is established by a cause. 

Answer: That cause must be established by another cause. If the 
cause can't produce itself, it shouldn't be able to produce something 
else either. 

14 (ET130-131) Even if the opponent assumes that qualities 
inhere in things, color cannot smell; the unity of such composite 
things (samuha) as the pot is impossible. 

15 (21130-131) The pot is dependent upon its material qualities 
in the same way as this material quality is dependent upon air and 
the other three elements of which it is comprised. 

16-18 (ET130-133) Fire and fuel (=the other three elements) are 
interdependent. Fire is defined as something that is hot and fuel as 
something that is not hot. Because something that is not hot cannot 
burn, there is no so-called fuel. Without fuel, there is no fire either. 
If fuel becomes hot, it should become fire. But if it does not become 
hot, there is nothing else inside fire that is not hot. If the atom of 
fire does not possess fuel, fire will exist without fuel. But if the fire 
atom did possess fuel, it would not be one in nature. 

19 (ET132-133) Unity and plurality are interdependent concepts. 
Since there are no things that are one in nature, there are no things 
that are plural in nature either. 

20 (ET132-133) Aryadeva criticizes the Samkhya thesis that 
material nature is one since there are three gunas which comprise 
it. 

21 (ET132-133) Intelligent people should analyze such theses as 
unity by applying the method of the catuskoti. 

22 (ET132-133) People might say that permanent things exist if 
they perceive the series of factors in the wrong way, or say that a 
thing exists if they perceive the collection of causes and conditions 
in the wrong way. 

23 (ET134-135) All things that have arisen in dependence, e.g., 
the aggregates, lack independent reality. Consequently, there is no 
essential nature. 

24 (ET134-135) A thing cannot be a union without at the same 


212 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


time being an effect. According to the noble ones, this kind of union 
is not a real union. 

25 (ET134-135) Consciousness is the seed of the cycle of 
existence; sense objects are the sphere of its activity. When 
selflessness is perceived in all sense objects, this seed will cease. 


Chapter Fifteen: The Refutation of Conditioned Things?" 


1-3 (ET134-137) Aryadeva criticizes the asatkdryavada thesis 
since there can be no relation between the cause and its previously 
nonexistent effect if that effect, at the time of its origination, 
destroys the cause. He criticizes the satkaryavada thesis since there 
is no need for the origination of something that already exists. 

4 (ET136-137) Something that has its own nature, e.g., milk, 
cannot change and become something different, e.g., curds. 

5 (ET136-137) Each mark--origination, duration, and cessation-- 
depends on the other two. 

6 (ET136-137) The essential nature or identity of a thing is 
determined in relation to something else that has a different nature. 
Because of the interdependence of one nature with another, nothing 
can be said to arise solely from itself or from something different. 

7 (ET136-137) The mark does not arise before, after, or 
simultaneously with the marked thing. 

8 (ET136-137) Something that has newly arisen in the past 
cannot change its nature and become old, nor can something that 
will newly arise in the future change its nature and become old. 

9 (ET136-137) The present thing does not come into existence by 
itself, since cause and effect do not exist simultaneously, nor does 
it come into existence from a nonexistent cause, e.g., past or future. 

10-13 (ET138-139) The marks of origination, duration, and 
cessation have no real existence and are like illusions. They cannot 
occur simultaneously because of their mutually incompatible 
natures, nor can they occur sequentially because each arises in 
dependence upon the other two. To suggest that each mark also 
contains within itself the secondary marks (anulaksana) of 
origination, duration, and cessation leads to difficulties in 
distinguishing one from another. 

14-15 (ET138-139) Existent things and nonexistent things do not 
originate from causes like themselves or different from themselves. 


CATUHSATAKA 213 


16-24 (ET140-143) There is no origination of a thing in relation 
to the completed past, the uncompleted future, or a third 
intermediate state presently in the process of completion. A thing 
does not arise when it is presently in the process of arising because 
at that time it is only half-arisen. Alternatively, if past and future 
also are in the process of arising, it would follow that everything 
would be in the process of arising. The cessation of the process of 
arising does not produce a thing that has arisen because once 
something that has arisen exists, there is no further occurrence of 
the process of arising. The process of arising, moreover, is not the 
unarisen having arisen, for that is like saying that something which 
is nonexistent arises. 

25 (ET142-143) Since cause and effect have no independent 
existence, both activity and inactivity have no substratum. 


Chapter Sixteen: The Discussion between Teacher and Student?!” 


1 (ET142-143) All the preceding chapters refute the views of 
those who perceive empty things as if they were not empty. 

2 (ET142-143) Objection: Since the disputant, his subject, and his 
assertions exist, it is wrong to say that everything is empty. 

Answer: There is no intrinsic nature in any of these three things 
that could be the basis for their arising. 

3-5 (ET142-145) The opponent (or the student assuming his role 
as the title suggests) claims that by discovering an error (dosa) 
which refutes his adversary's thesis that things are empty, his own 
thesis that things are not empty is affirmed. Aryadeva responds in 
kind that the refutation of his opponent's thesis should establish his 
thesis of emptiness. But the opponents’ theses of identity, 
difference, or indeterminability are not real theses because they 
cannot withstand critical analysis. 

6 (ET144-145) Objection: In our system, which holds that a pot 
is directly perceptible, the thesis that it is empty is rejected. 

Answer: Any reason (in argument) based upon beliefs held in the 
opponent's system is not valid when applied to other systems. 

7-8 (ET144-145) Objection: How can something empty occur 
without something nonempty? A counterthesis must have a thesis 
opposed to it. : 

Answer: If anything could be a thesis, even what is not a thesis 


214 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(i.e., emptiness) would have the appearance of a thesis. But since 
there is no nonthesis, there is no counterthesis either. 

9 (ET144-145) To the opponent's contention that if things are 
nonexistent fire should not be hot, Aryadeva responds that the 
refutation of the relation between fire and heat is given above (at 
14.16-17). 

10 (ET144-145) If the thesis that a thing is nonexistent can refute 
the thesis that it is existent, once the error in all four positions (of 
the catuskoti) is rejected, what thesis will there be then? 

11 (ET146-147) Even atoms cannot be characterized as having 
real existence. 

12-13 (ET146-147) If all things are characterized as nondual 
nothing could have real existence because this distinction is based 
upon duality. Moreover, when all things are characterized as 
nonexistent, it is impossible to distinguish one from another, since 
a property that all possess cannot be the basis for discriminating 
among different substances. 

14 (ET146-147) The opponent claims that the Madhyamakas 
cannot refute their opponent's theses because they deny the 
existence of real theses. Aryadeva responds that his opponent 
cannot prove his thesis either (the opponent's "own thesis" = the 
"Madhyamaka's opponent's thesis"). 

15 (ET146-147) Why, if Madhyamakas find it easy to refute 
others’ theses, can't their opponents point out the error in 
Madhyamaka theses? 

16 (ET148-149) If something exists simply because an opponent 
affirms its existence, why isn't it nonexistent simply because the 
Madhyamakas deny its existence? 

17 (ET148-149) Objection: Since we employ the term "existing" 
there must be some existent thing to which this term refers. 

Answer: The term itself is artificially created and thus not really 
existent. 

18 (ET148-149) The claim that things referred to by ordinary 
language exist in a conventional sense cannot prove that these 
things really exist. 

19-20 (ET148-149) The opponent suggests that the 
Madhyamakas' refutation of all things is nihilism. Aryadeva's reply 
Stresses the interdependent establishMent of existent and 
nonexistent things. 


CATUHSATAKA 215 


21-22 (ET148-151) The opponent contends that the 
Madhyamakas' use of arguments and examples in debate implies 
that not all things are empty. Aryadeva replies that both the thesis 
and the argument are similarly empty and the argument, being the 
same as the thesis, cannot prove anything. Some examples, 
however, are more appropriate than others. 

23 (ET150-151) The benefit of perceiving the emptiness of things 
lies in the destruction of the bondage caused by conceptual 
constructions. 

24 (ET150-151) The ascription of existence to one thing and 
nonexistence to another is not in accord with either ultimate truth 
or the conventions of ordinary language. 

25 (ET150-151) No criticism can be leveled against an opponent 
who does not hold any thesis, e.g., existence, nonexistence, both or 
neither. 


49. ARYADEVA, *Sataka 
Summary by Karen C. Lang 


The *Sata(ka)sastra (Pai-lun) exists only in Kumarajiva's Chinese 
translation. This translation includes a commentary by Vasu which 
closely resembles certain passages in the Ta chih tu lun.”° Both the 
preface of Seng-chao and Chi-tsang's commentary indicate that 
Kumarajiva translated (in 404 C.E.) only 50 of Aryadeva's original 
100 sutras." The authenticity of the *Sataka has been questioned. 
But the Ti p'o p'u sa chuan states that Aryadeva wrote two works: 
the *Sataka in twenty chapters and Catuhéataka; and the 1Dan dkar 
ma catalog lists a text in 100 verses by Aryadeva extant in Tibet in 
the eighth century C.E. Although the *Sataka and the CatuhSataka 
discuss many of the same topics, the arrangement of the topics, the 
arguments used against the opponents' theses, and the length and 
style of these two texts differ.” 

The work has been translated by G. Tucci (50.4.3)(our "T") in 
Pre-Dinnaga Texts on Buddhist Logic (Gaekwad's Oriental Series 
XLIX, Baroda 1929. 


216 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Chapter One: Renunciation of Demerit and Merit 


1 (T3-9) Only the Buddha's teaching, summarized as the 
elimination of evil and cultivation of merit, is the right view. Against 
criticism of the Buddhist position on pleasure, Aryadeva replies that 
there is no satisfaction because experience shows that no object will 
invariably produce a satisfying response in all people. The mark of 
satisfaction is not inherently produced, like the taste of salt; neither 
is it produced by some other cause nor by itself and something else. 
He rejects the argument that something inherently satisfying can 
cause something frustrating by using the analogy of a lamp, which 
cannot illuminate itself and something else, viz., darkness, since 
marks like light and darkness (or satisfaction and frustration) cannot 
exist simultaneously. Further, the great power of frustration 
overcomes anything that is initially satisfying. 

2 (T10-18) Objection: One should cultivate merit because it 
brings good results. 

Answer: Giving is meritorious but it is taught to people of low 
ability; moral conduct is taught to people of middling ability, and 
knowledge to people of the highest ability. Giving or moral conduct 
undertaken for reward (e.g., wealth, a better rebirth) is inferior; 
inferior knowledge concerns worldly activities. The cultivation of 
merit and the rejection of evil is the teaching that involves activity 
but the renunciation of both merit and demerit is the teaching that 
involves withdrawal from activity. Merit should be rejected since it 
has a double nature and is not permanent; the merit from sacrifice 
especially should be rejected since it involves taking life. 

3. (T19) When mind no longer focusses on the marks of past, 
present, or future dharmas, since none have a nature of their own-- 
this is what is meant by knowledge of the signless. 


Chapter Two: Refutation of the Self 


1 (T19-22) Samkhya: Not all phenomena are empty and signless 
because the self exists and consciousness is its mark. 

Answer: If consciousness is its mark, the self cannot be 
permanent because consciousness is caused and caused phenomena 
are impermanent. Consciousness cannot characterize the self since 
it is limited and the self is all-pervasive and should have the marks 





SATAKA 217 


of consciousness and unconsciousness. If the opponent then claims 
that the power to become conscious is a latent force which the self 
possesses, brought about by a combination of causes, the response 
is the same: if the power and its possessor are not different, both 
will be caused and impermanent. 

2 (123-26) Nyaya-Vaisesika: The self and awareness are different 
phenomena which become united. 

Answer: The ability to know characterizes consciousness. 

3 (T27-28) The self cannot be described as one if it is marked by 
consciousness since our conscious experiences are multiple and 
diverse. 

4 (T28-31) Inference cannot prove the self. The opponent's 
example of fire existing in the ashes when there is no smoke does 
not prove his claim that the self exists when there is no conscious 
experience. 

5 (T31-34) The claim that the self exists because color is 
perceived is challenged: If the self can see why doesn't it use ears 
instead of eyes? When the opponent replies that the relation 
between sense faculty and object is fixed, Aryadeva counters: The 
self doesn't have eyes and without eyes it must be blind! 

Objection: The internal organ aids the self in perception. 

Answer: What use is the self if the internal organ knows objects? 

6 (134-37) Objection: A permanent self is the basis for the 
memory of past experiences. 

Answer: If the self is all-pervasive, everything must be 
remembered simultaneously. 


Chapter Three: Refutation of Identity 


1 (137-39) Objection: The substance pot and its marks existence 
and unity are one. 

Answer: If the two are identical, it is impossible to determine that 
existence is located only in the pot. The pot and its mark existence 
are two things and the mark two should characterize the pot, not 
one. 

2 (T40) The opponent objects that the pot exists because people 
see it and believe that it exists. Aryadeva responds that if existence 
is not somehow different from the thing that exists, things would 
not exist. 


218 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


3 (T40-41) Objection: The pot is related to existence in the same 
wy oe parts (e.g., feet, head) are related to the whole (e.g., the 

ody). 

Answer: If the foot and the body are not different, the foot 
should not be different from the head either! If the parts were 
entirely different, no whole could be comprised of these unrelated 
parts. 

4 (141-42) Objection: The multiple material forms color, taste 
etc. produce the pot as their one effect. , 

Answer: The pot is multiple and not one because the material 
forms that comprise it are multiple. Since the opponent has failed 
to prove that a single pot exists, the "forms" said to be the causes of 
this nonexistent effect also do not exist. 

5 (143) The claim that cause and effect are proven since they are 
mutually dependent like long and short is rejected because there is 
no real mark long that is present in something long, for some other 
cause is required to prove the mark long. Nor can the mark long be 
present in something short because this would be contradictory. 


Chapter Four: Refutation of Difference 


1 (T430-46) If the pot and its marks existence and unity are 
different, then the pot is neither one nor existent. 

2 (T47) If the mark existence establishes the marked thing then 
duality, not unity, is assumed. 

3 (147-49) The whole/part relationship is rejected on the same 
grounds as in Chapter III, except that there the opponent claims that 


atoms are the parts that make up a whole and that each atom has 
this creative power. 


Chapter Five: Refutation of Sense Perception 


1 (T50-51) Aryadeva argues against the Nyaya-Vaisesika thesis 
that awareness arises from the contact of the visual sense faculty 
color and the rental faculty by analyzing the relation between 
knowledge and perception and between the sense faculty and its 
object. Awareness cannot arise prior to vision because it will have 
No cause; it cannot arise afterwards because it will have no function. 

2 (E52-54) If the mental faculty moves out to contact the object, 


SATAKA 219 


the body will be left unconscious. Alternatively, if the mental faculty 
remains in the body, there will be no contact between the sense 
faculty and the object. Because the mental faculty cannot see, the 
visual sense faculty cannot know, and the object cannot do either 
one, how can perception occur? 


Chapter Six: Refutation of Sense Objects 


1 (154-57) The direct perception of the entire pot is not possible 
by perceiving one part, e.g., color. Direct perception of partless 
atoms is not possible either. Touch apprehends some parts of the 
pot, but Aryadeva questions how the tangible parts of the pot can 
unite with nontangible parts. Further, if the pot is something 
different from its tangible parts, how can it unite with them? 

2 (157-58) The four great elements are not directly perceptible. 

3 (T58-59) Objection: Present objects are perceptible and present 
time must exist because the marks old and new are admitted. 

Answer: Present time is not involved in calling something "old" 
or "new". When something arises it is called "new"; otherwise it is 
"old". 


Chapter Seven: Refutation of Satkaryavada 


1 (T59-63) Samkhya: The effect pre-exists in its cause and is a 
transformation of its cause: cause and effect are one in substance. 

Reply: This position is a form of eternalism. When nothing is 
impermanent, merit cannot replace evil and the future cannot 
replace the present. Aryadeva denies that the effect pre-exists in its 
cause even in subtle form. 

2 (T64-65) An opponent objects that the effect pre-exists in its 
cause because specific causes produce specific effects. In reply, 
Aryadeva attacks the underlying premise of identity between cause 
and effect: if the effect and its cause exist together, both will perish 
together. 

3 (T64) The Sarvastivadin acceptance of a series of marks-- 
origination, duration, cessation--supports the opposite view that the 
effect is nonexistent prior to its production because an effect which 
has an origin cannot pre-exist. To the charge that rejection of a pre- 
existent effect leads to nihilism, Aryadeva replies that because 


220 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


continuity is admitted, the nihilist thesis is rejected, and because 
cessation is admitted, the eternalist thesis is rejected. 


Chapter Eight: Refutation of Asatkdryavada 


1 (T65-68) Aryadeva rejects the origination of an arisen or an 
unarisen effect, as well as one in the process of arising. Things do 
not originate either in a series or simultaneously. 

2 (T69-72) Things do not originate from themselves, from 
something else, or from both. Because there is no relation between 
something which is the object of origination and the mark 
origination (utpdda), neither can be used to prove that the other 
exists, nor can they together be used to prove that any factor exists. 
Existent things do not originate from existent things, and 
nonexistent things do not originate from nonexistent things. 


Chapter Nine: Refutation of Permanence 


1 (172-74) Objection: Uncaused and permanent things--akasa, 
time, spatial direction, atoms, and nirvana--must exist, since they 
have not been refuted. Because there are created things which are 
impermanent, there must be uncreated things which are permanent. 

Answer: By the same logic, if created things are existent, 
uncreated things must be nonexistent! 

2 (174-76) Objection: Akasa is permanent, all-pervasive, partless, 
and the substratum of motion. 

Answer: Space is not partless, an all-pervasive substratum, or 
permanent because it is divisible into parts. 

3 (176-78) Objection: Time is a permanent thing; it is not 
directly perceived but rather inferred from the seasons, etc. 

Answer: Time is not a permanent thing with its own mark 
because each of its divisions--past, present, and future--depends on 
the others. 

4 (178-79) Nyaya-Vaisesika: Spatial direction is a permanent 
thing. 

Answer: It is not permanent because it has parts, e.g., the eastern 
direction. 

5 (ET79-80) Nyaya-Vaisesika: Atoms are permanent things. 





SATAKA 221 


Answer: Atoms are not entirely in contact with one another 
because the atomic size of a single atom, the cause, is not seen in 
the double atom, the effect. This partial contact indicates that 
atoms have parts separated by space and therefore atoms are not 
partless and not permanent. 

6 (T80-81) Objection: Nirvana is the permanent absence of the 
defilements. 

Answer: Nirvana would then be a condition. 

7 (T81) The opponent claims that nirvana is the efficient cause 
of the cessation of the defilements. 

Answer: The cause of the defilements' cessation is not the same 
as the result of their cessation. On the other hand, if the opponent 
claims that nirvana is the result of the nonexistence of the 
defilements, Aryadeva replies: If nirvana were something different 
from the bond (= the defilements), the one bound, and the means 
of liberation, it could not arise from them. Further, nirvana is not 
a place which a self or the aggregates can reach. 


Chapter Ten: Refutation of Wrong Views of Emptiness 


1 (T82) The opponent argues that since Madhyamakas use 
negation some things, e.g., negations, etc., must exist. On the other 
hand, if the Madhyamakas deny that their negation is real, the 
things which it is supposed to negate must exist. Aryadeva replies 
that the negation is the same as the things negated, i.e., empty. 

2 (T83-85) Objection: The refutation of an opponent's thesis 
proves one's own. 

Answer: A thesis that affirms and one that refutes are not the 
same. The opponent objects that Madhyamaka tenets are contrary 
to world opinion. Aryadeva denies that this is so. 

3 (T85) The opponent objects that the Madhyamakas' denial that 
they hold a thesis is in fact a thesis. Aryadeva replies that what is 
not a thesis should not be called a thesis, just as nonexistence is not 
called existence. 

4 (T86) Objection: Things exist because they are mutually 
established. 

Answer: How is mutual establishment possible when one of the 
related things doesn't exist? The opponent argues that, like long and 
short, things establish one another. 


222 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


5 (T86-87) Objection: Your negation is not valid because it is 
empty. 

Answer: Although empty of any essential nature, things bind. 

6 (187-88) The opponent claims that if emptiness exists, all 
speech, including Buddhist teachings, should. also be empty. 
Aryadeva responds that Buddhist teachings are effective because 
they are expressed in ordinary language. When the opponent 
objects that worldly truth is not real, Aryadeva replies that both 
truths are real because each depends on the other. 

7 (188-89) Objection: What benefit is there in knowing this? 

Answer: Liberation results from repudiating factors, as well as 
from repudiating the self. 


50. ARYADEVA, Aksarasataka and Tika thereon 
Summary by Karen C. Lang 


The Chinese tradition attributes the verses to Aryadeva and the 
commentary to an unnamed student of Aryadeva's; the Tibetan 
tradition attributes both text and commentary to Nagarjuna. The 
Aksarasataka examines in much the same manner material treated 
in the *Sataka and the CatuhSataka, and Aryadeva is likely its 
author. The commentary’'s organization of the material follows an 
order similar to the commentary on the *Sataka II-X. 

"T" references are to Gokhale (50.1.1).22 


1. Things Are Not Identical 


(T4) A Samkhya opponent claims that because all things have an 
identical mark, the nature of such things as pot and cloth is 
identical. 

Answer: A reason (hetu) must support the thesis. If the opponent 
contends that singularity constitutes the mark, this claim cannot 
Serve as a reason because it is the same as what is to be proved 
(sddhyasama); and if duality exists it defeats the thesis of identity. 





AKSARASATAKA 223 
2. Things Are Not Different 


(T4-5) A Vaisesika opponent claims that things are different 
because they have different marks. 

Answer: Differences in mark cannot serve as the reason for the 
thesis of difference because it is the same as what is to be proved. 
Even if the marks are different, the thesis is not proved, for if the 
opponent says that this and that mark are not the same, each mark 
is specific (visesa) and individual things so marked are themselves 
one in nature. 


3. Existence Must Be Proved 


(T5-6) Objection: Things exist because we see that they have the 
mark existence and flowers in the sky do not. 

Answer: Either the reason has the mark of existence or the mark 
of nonexistence. If it has the mark of existence, this is the same as 
what is to be proved, since both the mark of direct perception and 
the mark of existence must be proved. The alternative defeats the 
thesis. 


4. There Is No Cause 


(T6-7) Objection: Things exist because they have causes. 

Answer: If the effect pre-exists in the cause, clay is not the cause 
of the pot's existence because it already exists. But if the effect is 
nonexistent in the cause, there is still no cause for the pot since it 
does not exist. The example, viz., sand is not the cause of oil, 
implies that cause and effect are not random relations. The claim 
that the effect both exists and does not exist in its cause incurs the 
fallacies of both theses. Further, if a thing is produced without a 
cause, the cause has no function; this last alternative defeats the 
thesis. 


5. Things are Dependent 
(T7) The opponent claims that because of causal efficacy (Sakti) 


both cause and effect should be admitted. 
Answer: Both cause and effect depend on each other. Causality 


224 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


applies to a cause because it has an effect. Because of this 
interdependence of cause and effect, it follows that causality applies 
also to the effect. Since the effect has causality, it is a cause and not 
an effect. Without effects, there are no causes. Such causes as 
primal nature (prakrti), God, atoms, space, and time are 
interdependent causes and are not permanent. 


6. A Thesis Is Not Proved by Tenets Which The Opponent Accepts 


(T7-8) The opponent cannot use arguments based on tenets of 
his own school to prove his theses. 


7. The Reason Is Ineffective 


(T8-9) The opponent argues that no causes produce nonexistent 
things, e.g., a barren woman's son. But causes regularly produce 
certain effects, e.g., sesame produces oil. 

Answer: The opponent must state the hetu, sapaksa and vipaksa 
to prove the thesis of causality. Yet when the thesis is stated, the 
reason is not present because it has not yet been stated; when the 
reason is stated, the thesis has ceased being stated. The simultaneity 
of the thesis and the reason is not possible, for when one says "pra", 
the "ti" and "jfia" are not uttered. Thus reasons are ineffective in 
establishing the thesis of causality, just as causes are ineffective in 
producing a eunuch's son. 


8. The Nature Of A "Self" Must Be Explained 


(T9) The opponent claims that the self exists and is challenged 
to state its nature. If the essential nature of the self is consciousness, 
the self is not permanent because consciousness is not permanent. 
If the essential nature of the self is unconsciousness, the unconscious 
self cannot experience pleasure or pain. The opponent now argues 
that the self becomes conscious when it is connected with 
consciousness. The Buddhist replies that because consciousness is 
then connected with this unconscious self it should become 
unconscious. 


AKSARASATAKA 225 
9. There Is Error In Identity 


(T9) The opponent argues for identity because the pot is not 
different from the marks existence and one. 

Answer: If the pot without its marks is not the pot, the marks 
existence and one must be the pot and the pot must be multiple in 
nature and not one. Furthermore, if one, existence, and the pot are 
identical, existence and one should be destroyed when the pot is 
destroyed, just as the kara (a word meaning hand) is destroyed 
when the hasta (another word meaning hand) is destroyed. 


10. If There Is Difference, The Thing is Nonexistent 


(T9-10) The Vaisesika opponent argues for difference because the 
pot and its marks are different. The pot, the number one, and 
existence are not confused because substances, qualities, motions, 
universals, individuators, and inherence are different things; e.g., 
the pot is a substance, the number one is a quality, and existence is 
a universal. 

Answer: If the pot is separate from existence, it doesn't exist. We 
see that the sword and its sheath are different things, but because 
we cannot see the pet and its marks separately their difference is 
not proved. 


11. The Five Senses Do Not Apprehend Their Objects 


(T10) The opponent claims that through direct perception the pot 
is seen, whereas nonexistent things, e.g., flowers in the sky, are 
never seen. The Buddhist denies that the pot is seen by mounting an 
attack on the sense faculties’ ability to perceive an object. Either the 
eye or the internal organ/mind (manas) must see the pot. If the 
eye sees it, the eyes of a dead man should see it also! If the mind 
sees it, a blind man should see it! 


12. Color Is A Name; The Colored Thing Also Is Not Perceived 
(T10-11) The opponent now argues that the pot is seen because 


its color is seen. 
Answer: The pot and the color must be identical or different. If 


226 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


they are identical, the pot should be seen when that color is seen. 
Furthermore, if the pot and its color are identical, when the pot is 
destroyed, the color would be destroyed also. But if they are 
different, the pot cannot be visible. In response to the opponent's 
claim that the pot exists because it is visible, the Buddhist argues 
that when the pot is located in a place obstructed from vision it is 
invisible and then it should not exist. 


13. What Exists Is Not The Object of Action 


(T11) The opponent claims that the cause pre-exists in subtle and 
imperceptible form in its cause. After it arises, it becomes gross and 
can be perceived. 

Answer: If it already exists there is no need for an agent to bring 
it into existence. Further, if the effect pre-exists in the cause it is not 
a future thing. If there is no future thing there is no origination and 
destruction. Without origination and destruction there is no good 
and evil. Without good and evil there is no agent, action, demerit, 
merit, fruit and maturation. Moreover, if the effect which pre-exists 
in the cause is subtle, it is not gross. It is this gross effect, which 
does not pre-exist in the cause, that arises; the origination of a 
previously nonexistent effect contradicts your explanation of 
causality. 


14. Things Do Not Have Origination 


(T11-12) The opponent claims that his thesis, that the effect 
which is nonexistent in the cause arises, avoids the error of denying 
origination and cessation. 

Answer: If the pot is nonexistent in the clay, it is like tortoise 
hair, which cannot be woven. Neither a pre-existent effect nor a 
previously nonexistent effect arises. The already arisen doesn't arise 
because it has already arisen; the unarisen doesn't arise because it 
has not yet arisen. Moreover, it is wrong that a body originates by 
itself or from something else. If it is self-originated, what's the point 
of origination? If it's not self-originated, how can it originate from 
something else? The claim that it originates by itself and from 
something else is also wrong. Consequently, all things lack 
origination. 


AKSARASATAKA 227 


15. Conditioned Things Do Not Exist 


(T12-13) Objection: If there is no origination, conditioned things 
do not exist, since the three marks origination, duration and 
cessation characterize conditioned things. 

Answer: Neither conditioned things nor their marks exist. The 
three marks do not exist sequentially because it is wrong that when 
one exists, the other two do not. They cannot be simultaneous 
either, for if there is cessation where there is origination, origination 
is not origination. Since the marks origination and cessation are 
mutually incompatible, they cannot exist at the same time. Nor is 
it possible that origination, being a conditioned thing itself, has 
es three marks, because this would lead to an infinite regress of 
marks. 


16. Unconditioned Things Do Not Exist 


(T13-14) The opponent argues that the negation of conditioned 
things establishes the existence of unconditioned things; and if 
unconditioned things exist, their opposites, conditioned things, must 
also exist. He cites space (akdsa) as an example of an 
unconditioned thing, and describes it as all-pervasive and partless. 

Answer: Space either has parts or it doesn't. If it has parts, the 
space must remain confined within the limits of the body that 
contains it. If it doesn't have parts, either the body pervades space 
or vice versa. In either case, space has limits, and like other limited 
things, e.g., pot, space is impermanent. Moreover, permanent 
causes should produce permanent effects; if the effect is 
impermanent, its cause should be impermanent. 

Objection: There are two kinds of causes: instrumental causes 
(karanahetu) and manifesting causes (vyarijakahetu). Instrumental 
causes produce impermanent things, e.g., a pot. Manifesting causes 
reveal things already present, e.g., a lamp's light reveals the pot. 
Because these revealed things are not created, they are permanent. 

Answer: We see that created things exist but not uncreated 
things. Since they do not exist, uncreated things are not permanent. 


228 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
17. Things Are Like Dreams 


(T14-15) The comparison of things to dreams means that they 
exist on a conventional level. A dream is not substantially existent, 
it is not nonexistent, and it is not uncaused; the same description 
applies to such things as houses constructed from beams. 


18. The Name (Or Mark) Doesn't Exist 


Answer: The name is not the thing. If names were the thing, the 
name "pot" should contain milk, etc. Just by saying the name a pot 
should appear without any effort by the potter! The name is just 
conventional, not real. 


19. It Is The Same As What Is To Be Proved 


(T15) Objection: Does what you refute have an essential nature 
or not? If it has, your thesis is negated. But if it hasn't, it cannot be 
refuted because it has no essential nature. 

Answer: The refutation, the thing refuted, and the person making 
the refutation are interdependent. We refute your thesis that 
essential nature is the mark of things. If there is no nature that 
exists by virtue of itself, there is nothing for us to refute. 


51.AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Tathdgatotpattisambhavanirdesasutra™ 


52. UPASANTA, Abhidharmahrdaya”® 

Charles Willemen says that this author "must have lived between 
the time of the five hundred arhats in Kagmir (second century A.D.)" 
(which are mentioned more than once) “and the time of 
Dharmatrata, author of the Samyuktabhidharmahrdaya (fourth 
century)", who mentions Upasanta. He was a master of Gandhara.”° 
Willemen reports that the stanzas of Upaganta's text are the same as 
those of Dharmatrata's work by the same name (#21 of Volume 
Seven of this Encyclopedia), but that the commentary is more 
detailed.”” 


229 


53. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, SatasGhasrikdprajiiaparamita’* 

This text, along with 54 and 55 below, "are really one and the 
same book. They only differ in the extent to which the ‘repetitions’ 
are copied out."”° The Satasahasrika--meaning 100,000 lines--is 
extant in Sanskrit, Chinese and Tibetan manuscripts. It consists of 
three parts: the first part is "an expansion of Chapter I of the 
Astasdhasrikaprajfiaparamita"° with new items added; the second 
"follows Asta chapters 2 to 18 fairly closely";?* and the third "is an 
independent treatise...throughout concerned with the obvious 
conflict that exists between an ontology which proclaims the 
emptiness of everything, and the practical needs of the struggle for 
enlightenment."”? 


54. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Paricavimsatiprajhaparamita 

A portion of this work--25,000 lines--has been discovered among 
the Gilgit mss., and some other passages are preserved in Sanskrit. 
The work is available in Chinese and Tibetan. The Chinese 
translations date from the third to the seventh century A.D.”** 


55.AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Astadasasahasrikaprajfiaparamita™ 
There remains no complete Sanskrit manuscript of this work-- 
18,000 lines. Gilgit manuscripts of portions have been edited. 


56. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Sanmukhidharani** 
Summary by Stefan Anacker 


This small text which includes a dharani (mantra) consisting of 
feminine vocatives, is termed by later Tibetan classification a text of 
the Sautrantikas. There is, however, not much to support this view. 
It seems a fully Mahayana text with a focus on the path of 
bodhisattvas. 


The Six Doors 
(1) The sufferings which I have felt in samsara are felt by all 


sentient beings indiscriminately. 
(2) The worldly success and happiness which I have experienced 


230 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
should be experienced by all sentient beings. 

(3) My bad actions and the roots of the badness within me 
should be confessed in an ultimate confession. 

(4) The acts of Mara against me should be known by an ultimate 
comprehension. 

(5) My roots of goodness, joined with the perfections whether 
worldly or supramundane, should be experienced by all sentient 
beings. 

(6) My liberation should serve that of all sentient beings. May 
I be established in neither samsara nor nirvana. 

57. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Jinaputrarthasiddhisiitra”*® 
58. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Ksemamkarapariprechasiitra”” 
59. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Mahdldlikapariprechasiitra”** 
60. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Nagaropamasiitra*”? 

61. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Nandopanandandgarajasiitra*”” 
62. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Puspakiitadharanisiitra™ 


63. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, 
Tathagatajfianamudra(samadhi)stitra™” 


64. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Vatsasiitra”*? 
65. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Tathagatapratibimbapratisthanasutra™ 


66. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Suratapariprechasutra*** 


MATRCETA 
Summaries by Christian Lindter 


Matrceta, a pupil of Aryadeva, Nagarjuna's personal student, was 
a contemporary of a certain Kusana king Kaniska (there are at least 





MATRCETA 231 


three known mahdrdjas of that name). Besides the works treated 
below, one should mention Pranidhanasaptati**® and Catur- 
viparyayakatha, which, like several passages in the works of 
Nagarjuna and Aryadeva, deals, in thirty-one stanzas, with the four 
misconceptions, i.e., the fundamental evil of ignorance. Matrceta is 
often mentioned or quoted in later literature, e.g., in the 
Mahdprajfiaparamitopadesa, the Chinese translation of which, by 
Kumiarajiva, was completed in 406 A.D. 


67. Maharajakaniskalekha 


(The work is edited by M. Hahn, Bern 1992. It is composed of 
85 verses. ) 

The king, addressed as "god" (deva), is encouraged to practise 
virtues (guna), like a god, and to avoid immoral vices (dosa). The 
common people will remain loyal to him when they also accumulate 
good karma in this way. Rebirth (samsara) is suffering, and the only 
thing that counts is one's good or bad actions. One must never cause 
harm to other living beings, but rather show compassion towards 
them. 


68.Vamnarhavarna or Catuhsataka 


(This hymn has been edited by Jens-Uwe Hartmann, Gottingen 
1987, and is addressed to the Buddha. It is probably earlier than 
69.Satapaficasatka, and consists of twelve chapters totalling 386 
stanzas. ) 

The virtues of the Buddha are so numerous and so profound that 
it is impossible to praise him adequately. He is simply incomparable. 
Nevertheless, it is a matter of great virtue to spend one's time 
praising what cannot really be praised! And so the Buddha is 
praised with devotion (bhakti) for being omniscient, compassionate, 
an arhat, the most precious of all jewels, the most beautiful of all 
beings, the greatest ascetic, the knower of the Vedas and Vedangas, 
the teacher of the world, a lion among men, a man of racial purity 
(djaneya), the best among physicians, the originator of gain and 
security (i.e., happiness, yogaksema, cf. Bhagavadgita 9.22), the 
most perfectly pure, the one whose soul has developed into 
emptiness, who is absolutely free, the most beautiful sight to be 


232 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


seen, the one who has two bodies, the one whose actions are 
absolutely pure, who is silent, the master of the world, the best 
among bipeds, the eye and the light of the world, the guru of gurus 
without a guru, the one to be praised by all, etc. etc. What, in short, 
is more reasonable to do than to bow down in adoration of the 
Buddha? Furthermore, the Buddha has the thirty-two major and the 
eighty minor marks of a true superman. He belongs to the pure 
Aryan race like all the other Buddhas.” His beautiful body shines 
upon the world like the sun, and he has a complete knowledge of 
all dharmas. He is the best among living beings, just as freedom is 
the best kind of purity, emptiness the best among truths, and 
patience the best kind of austerity. He, of course, has the ten 
cognitive powers (bala) and the four convictions (vaisa@radya) so 
characteristic of all Buddhas. 

Chapters 5-7 provide us, as it were, with a small compendium of 
the Buddhist "art of speech", i.e. rhetoric or religious oratory. The 
words of the Buddha are pure, i.e. they are clear, persuasive and 
consistent, they are not repetitious, ambiguous or contradictory. 
Avoiding disputes (avivada) he refutes his opponents by good 
arguments (nyaya) and proofs (upapatti). Moreover, his speech is 
in accordance with the two truths. It is neither too sweet nor rude. 
It is not partial and not intemperate. It is encouraging, not 
contemptuous. It is to the point, sometimes brief, sometimes 
detailed. It is harmonious, free, rich, never vain. Without confusing 
the issues it is full of marvels, captivating, not colored but bright 
and unresistable, penetrating and incomprehensible for ordinary 
folk. For a good man, however, it is like nectar. In the relative 
sense, karmic purity and impurity are simple facts. In the ultimate 
sense, however, in emptiness, there is no "soul" or agent responsible 
for karma. 

That all factors are empty, that things are momentary, that 
nirvana is peace, are dharmic facts beyond dispute. Why should the 
Buddha who knows the truth engage himself in a dispute with the 
world which does not know the truth? The difference between the 
Buddha's dharma and that of others is simply enormous! His is true 
and pure, that of others false and impure. However, if we choose to 
allegorise (anuvdda) the Veda we can say that the Buddha 
corresponds to Brahma, his Dharma to Brahman, and a Buddhist to 
a true Brahmana, priest or theologian. The three main Vedic metres 





VARNARHAVARNA 233 


are even expressed in the Buddhist pratityasamutpada! 

The Buddha has made the path to nirvana into a royal highway 
that even children and women can follow. In samsara he makes a 
distinction between good and bad factors. Good karma brings about 
happiness in life. After enlightenment, in nirvana, however, when 
one is a Buddha, there is, in a sense, neither good nor bad karma. 
Still the Buddha, through his great compassion, does everything he 
can to help all suffering beings out of samsara by opening the 

lorious road that leads to immortality. Some follow the path of 
Sravakas, others that of Pratyekabuddhas, others that of Mahayana. 
With his great compassion he embraces the entire world, as it were. 
He is the leader and good friend of all living beings. His generosity 
towards all is in fact so great that one can only praise him as one 
who can never be repaid for all the good he has done. 

In two chapters (10 and 11) Matrceta praises the beauty of the 
Buddha's physical body: his deep blue eyes, his lips, his teeth, his 
hair, etc. No less than thirty-three verses are composed in praise of 
the "great tongue" of the Buddha. In it Méatrceta saw the 
personification or rather embodiment of Sarasvati, the Indian 
goddess of speech. After all, no tongue, no teaching! 

To conclude: There is no "field" of merit in the three worlds as 
pure as that of the Buddha, whose compassion has brought him 
from his peace in nirvana into the impermanence and suffering of 
samsara. Buddhism is not what it used to be when the Lord was still 
here. Turning away in defeat from this life one should carefully keep 
in mind the parinirvana of the Buddhas (all thirty-five). (A final 
chapter 13, only in Tibetan, may well be authentic, but hardly 
contains anything new.) 


69. SataparicaSatka or Prasadapratibhodbhava 


(This work has been edited by D.R. Shackleton Bailey, Cambridge 
1951.) 

The theme is the same as in the previously summarized work 
(68). The Buddha has no faults at all in thought, word or deed, 
and his virtues simply range beyond calculation. Still, it brings merit 
to praise them! He has the six perfections leading to enlightenment, 
he is incomparable, his wonders are worthy of praise, and so is the 
beauty of his body, his great compassion, his speech, and his 


234 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


teaching. One should praise his previous vows: to listen to him 
brings satisfaction, to see him brings tranquillity, his speech 
refreshes, and his teaching liberates. Likewise, he deserves praise for 
compassionately offering all living beings guidance. His arduous 
deed should be praised, and so should his skill in expedients. One 
can never hope to make recompense to the Buddha for all the good 
things he has done by means of his spiritual and physica! body. Still, 
it is, as said, a very gocd thing for oneself and perhaps also for 
others to celebrate "not even a part of a fraction" of his virtues.”* 


70. UDBHATASIDDHASVAMIN, Visesastava 
Summary by Christian Lindtner 


(One of the earliest hymns of Mahayana to extol the virtues of 
the Bhagavat Buddha and, at the same time, to condemn the vices 
of rival religious teachers is the rather neglected Visesa- or Visista- 
stava of Udbhatasiddhasvamin. His date is uncertain: according to 
Taranatha he lived shortly after Kaniska, which would mean that he 
roughly belongs to the same milieu as Nagarjuna and Matrceta. The 
contents of this hymn, in seventy-six (or seventy-seven) verses, in 
praise of the virtues of the Buddha that distinguish him from others 
(hence the title), point in the same direction. There is an excellent 
edition of the Tibetan with a German translation by Johannes 
Schneider: Der Lobpreis der Vorziiglichkeit des Buddha. 
Udbhatasiddhasvamins Visesastava mit Prajfiavarmans Kommentar, 
Bonn 1993.) 

1-3. It is because most people do not recognize faults as faults 
that they, instead of recognizing the virtues of the Bhagavat 
(Buddha), naively believe in Krsna (Visnu), Isvara etc. 

4-12. But, as many well-known legends show, Mahadeva (Siva) 
was full of anger and desire, he was vulnerable to harm and 
deception--as opposed to the Buddha. 

13-16. Brahman and the other gods imagine that they have 
created the world, not being aware that it is in fact created by 
karma. 

17-18. As opposed to others the Buddha has only sacrificed 
himself, not other living creatures. 

19-22. He never curses other people, only their ignorance and 





VISESASTAVA 235 


desire; and he does not contradict himself, or merely repeat what 
others have said, like Vyasa. 

23-27. As opposed to Vedic words those of the Buddha's lion's 
roar are not at all secret! Followers of Samkhya, Vaisesika and 
Jainism are often lustful, exclusive or too much devoted to external 
tapas, respectively, and as opposed to the Buddhists. The tarkikas 
have not realized the doctrine of emptiness of substances. 

28-29. Suka, as opposed to his teacher Janaka, was liberated by 
going through the disc of the sun. The Buddhists follow their 
teacher, and are liberated where they are. 

30-41. Further examples of gods and heroes who were dominated 
by their wives, or who caused harm to or deceived others, or have 
otherwise, again as opposed to the Bhagavat, behaved 
inappropriately. 

42. The priests think that good and bad karma can be transferred 
to others, but the Buddha knows that only oneself is responsible for 
one's own karma. 

43-45. The followers of Samkhya, VaiSesika and Jainism 
respectively think that the soul has consciousness, lacks 
consciousness, or that it has the same size as the body; but the 
Buddha has refuted all these notions. 

46. Nor does he, like the priests, accept a permanent soul. 

47-49. Kapila has no compassion, he did not understand that 
people are reborn due to their vices and karma, and he (and others) 
believed that even the liberated soul could be the cause of existence 
(rebirth). 

50-53. Other misunderstandings not shared by the Buddha: that 
liberation is related to movement, that building gardens, etc. is evil, 
that life moves from one body to another, that one gets a good 
rebirth if killed by a furious enemy in battle. 

54-56. The Buddha condemns incest (agamyagamana), he is 
never armed, he is no terrorist. 

57-60. He is omniscient, his words are never contradictory, he 
preaches to all who wish to listen, he is free from passion. 

61. The sensual cognition of Kapila cannot bring about liberation. 

62. The idea that one can transfer one's good karma to other 
living beings is only to be found in Mahayana. 

63-64. Again, the Buddha strongly condemns bloody sacrifices. 

65. His good dharma is one of truth, honesty, brahmacarya, 


236 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


discipline and love. 

66-70. The Buddha treats his enemies with compassion, as 
opposed to Krsna, etc. 

71-76. The more one contemplates the folly of the opponents the 
stronger one's faith. It corresponds to Matrceta's prasdda in the 
omniscient Buddha. To proclaim his virtues is good not merely for 
oneself but, hopefully, also for all others! 


71. RAHULABHADRA, Prajfidparamitastotra 


David Seyfort Ruegg® provides a thorough account of what is 
known or can be conjectured about this writer. He is cited in 
various places as a teacher of Nagarjuna, in various other places as 
a disciple of Nagarjuna.” He is credited with a commentary on 
Nagarjuna's 33.Miilamadhyamakakarikas, which is said to have been 
translated into Chinese by Paramartha, but is not available now. He 
also composed a hymn in twenty verses. to the 
103.Saddharmapundarika. The text has been edited by R. Hikata 
and translated by Edward Conze.”*? 


Summary by David Seyfort Ruegg”? 


"In the Prajfiaparamitdstotra the prajfiapdramita is described as 
beyond dichotomizing conceptualization (nirvikalpa) and discursive 
development (nisprapafica). Rahulabhadra writes: He who sees thee 
as thou really art (or: devotedly)** sees the tathdgata. The 
Buddhas are thy beloved sons, and thou art thus the tender 
progenetrix of all Heroes devoted to the weal of others. Though one, 
thou are praised under various appellations by the tathdgatas, who 
thus make thee accessible to their disciples. Also when thou are 
reached, faults and disputes raised by polemicists vanish. Thus thou 
terrifiest the foolish whilst thou comfortest the wise. Not coming 
from anywhere and not going anywhere, thou are not made into an 
object of perception (anupalabhyase) by the wise; however, those 
who see thee not but do truly (or devotedly, bhavatas) take recourse 
to thee are released as soon as they have done so: this is a great 
marvel! By the protectors of the world (lokanatha) who, for the sake 
of conventional communication (prajfiaptyartha) with incarnate 
beings, adopt transactional linguistic usage (vyavahdra), thou are 


PRAJNAPARAMITASTOTRA 237 


expressed out of compassion--without being (really thus) expressed. 
Indeed, who is able to praise thee who art without phenomenal 
mark (nirnimitta) and pure (nirafijana), who transcendest the entire 
realm of words, and who art not fixed anywhere? However, we who 
have praised thee who art not to be praised according to convention 
(samvrti) are fulfilled through verbal expressions." 


72. KUMARALATA 


Kumaralata is an important teacher prior to Asanga and 
Vasubandhu to whom they both refer but whose works have not 
been found. According to Jean Przyluski* Kumaralata was the 
founder of the Darstantika sect, and his followers included 
126.Harivarman and 158.Srilata. Junsho Kato> has collected 
references to Kumaralata found in various places. He is said to have 
written two works, one titled Kie man louen, translated as 
Drstantapankti, the other Koueng chouo p'i yu or Drstantamdlya,**° 
apparently lost. The former work may be the same as a work titled 
Kalpanamandatika, which is ascribed to Kumaralata in the colophon 
found in a fragment, and is the same work as the Sutralamkara 
ascribed to Avaghosa.**” Kato and others believe Kumaralata was 
Srilata's teacher, but this is not absolutely clear. Przyluski thinks 
Kumaralata composed the Sitralamkara regularly attributed to 
Agvaghosa. Given this multitude of conflicting opinion we place 
Kumaralata here chronologically as Harivarman's teacher, but with 
little conviction. 


73. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Aksayamatinirdesasiitra**® 
Summary by Leslie S. Kawamura 


Aksayamati's discourse concerns eighty inexhaustible topics. 1. 
The first occurrence of an enlightenment mind.** 2. Earnest 
intention. 3. The linking-up phase. 4. Aspiration. 5. Perfection of 
giving. 6. Perfection of ethical behavior. 7. Perfection of endurance. 
8. Perfection of endeavour. 9. Perfection of meditation. 10. 
Perfection of discriminating awareness. 11. Friendliness. 12. Loving- 
kindness. 13. Sympathetic joy. 14. Equanimity. 15-19. Five 


238 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


supersensible cognitions. 20-23. Four factors of attracting (people). 
24-27. Four detailed and accurate knowledges. 28-31. Four supports 
of confidence. 32-33. The two preparations of merit and knowledge. 
34-37. Four sustained attentivenesses. 38-41. Four correct exertions. 
42-45. Four footholds for higher cognition. 46-50. Five powers. 51- 
55. Five strengths. 56-62. Seven adjuncts to enlightenment. 63-70. 
The noble eightfold path. 71-72. Calm and extraordinary seeing. 73- 
74. Unfailing memory and eloquent speech. 75-78. Four axioms of 
the teaching. 79. The only path to walk. 80. Expertise concerning 
appropriate action. 


74. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Angulimdlikdstitra?® 
75. AUTHOR UNKNOWN Asokadattavyakaranasiitra”®! 
76. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, ASsokarajavadanasiitra? 
77. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Astabuddhakasiitra®® 
78. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Bhadrakalpikasamadhisiitra™ 


It "extolls the thousand Buddhas in the present age 
(Bhadrakalpa), and enjoins the practice of 84,000 Perfections 
(paramitds)."?° 


79. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Bhadramayakaravy4akaranasiitra*® 
Summary by Constantin Regamey 


"The anecdotal contents of the siitra are constituted by the story 
of the juggler Bhadra who wanted to deceive the Buddha with 
magical tricks in order to prove that the claim of the Tathagata to 
omniscience was false. He created a magical feast in a rubbish hole 
and invited the Buddha with his monks. The Buddha saw through 
this stratagem, but performed such a magic that Bhadra could not 
revoke his charms, was obliged to acknowledge the superiority of 
the Buddha and was converted..." 

"Sections 79-121 are unconnected with the principal subject of 
the stitra. They contain the enumeration of the dharmas which 


BHADRAMAYAKARAVYAKARANA 239 


characterize a Bodhisattva,...belong mostly to the category of 
practical features or duties of the Bodhisattvas."“°” 


80. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Buddhasamgitistitra”® 
81. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Candraprabhakumarasiitra.” 
82. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Caturdarakasamdadhisiitra’”’ 

83. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Dasgabhiimikastitra?”! 


The work describes in detail the ten stages (dagabhtimi) of a 
Bodhisattva. A Bodhisattva is possessed of (1) delight (pramudita) 
arising from committing himself to ten vows under ten fundamental 
descriptions while renouncing all worldly wealth and pleasures and 
tisatyanirdeitaspractising ten virtues, (2) purity (vimala) in virtue of 
his morality of speech and conduct, (3) being a maker of light 
(prabhakari) through his realization of fundamental Buddhist truths 
about impermanence and non-egoity, and by his commitment to 
saving others from afflictions which he attains by mastering the four 
meditative stages and mystic trances. The Bodhisattva is (4) brilliant 
(arcismati) through his practice of the thirty-seven allies of 
enlightenment, (5) very difficult to conquer (sudurjaya), having 
mastered the ten purifications of awareness; he realizes that all 
factors are empty, yet studies carefully all sorts of subject-matters in 
order to gain the truth, (6) facing forward (abhimukhi) in virtue of 
his wisdom, (7) hard to measure (durangama), ceaselessly 
contemplating emptiness, signlessness and aimlessness, (8) 
immovable (acala) since nonretrogressing, he helps all by endowing 
them with visions of his wondrousness and does not enter nirvana 
but remains to help all others, (9) possessing goodness (sadhumati), 
he has the knowledge of disciples, those self-enlightened, the 
Bodhisattvas and the Tathagata himself, (10) the cloud of dharma. 
Having arrived at the summit he "puts out the flame of the 
afflictions produced by ignorance...His knowledge qua virtue of 
perfection becomes predominant..."?”2 

Hirakawa points out that "in this text, the last of the six 
perfections, the perfection of wisdom, was expanded by adding four 
new aspects to it--skill in means (updya), vows (pranidhana), 


240 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


strength (bala), and knowledge (jfiana), making a new total of ten 
perfections."?”* 


84. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Dasadigandhakaravidhvamsanasitra”” 
85. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, GarbhavakrantinirdeSastitra’’”> 
86. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Hastikaksayasiitra?”® 


According to Nakamura this is a "Meditation Sitra...Meditation 
was regarded as endowed with some miraculous power. For 
example, the Hastikaksaya-stitra says that one who observes this 
stitra becomes as powerful as an elephant."?”” 


87. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, 


(Upayakausalya)Jfanottarabodhisattvapariprechasttra’”® 


88. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Karunikarajasiitra?”® 
89. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Lokanathavyakaranasiitra® 
90. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Mahavaipulyamirdharajasiitra*™" 
91. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, MahdyadnopadeSasiitra*** 
92. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Maitreyapariprechaparivartasutra*®* 


93. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, 
Mafijusribuddhaksetragunavyihastitra’* 


The usual collection of Bodhisattvas listens to a discussion 
between Maijijusri, the Buddha and others. Some knotty 
philosophical puzzles are posed. E.g., what is the dharma of a 
Buddha? Is it a factor or not? What can be said about it? Majijusri's 
answer is "nothing can be said about it, any more than one can say 
whether empty space is or is not a factor". 


Or again, someone asks Maifijusri "since you have attained the ten 


stages of Bodhisattvahood why don't you attain enlightenment?" . 


Answer: "I already have!" Or, "why don't you urge all sentient beings 


MANJUSRIBUDDHAKSETRAGUNAVYUHA 241 


to attain enlightenment?" Answer: "Because there are no sentient 
beings". 


94. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Mafijusrivikriditasiitra”®> 
95. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Majijusrivikurvanaparivartasiitra®® 
96. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Nandapravrajyasiitra®’ 
97. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Paramarthasamvrtisatyanirdesastitra?® 
98. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Pravaranasiitra”®® 
99. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Ratnacandrapariprechasiitra?™ 
100. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Ratnaciidapariprechasiitra®™ 
101. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Ratnajalipariprechasiitra?” 
102. SAMANTABHADRA, Ratnakarandasiitra?™ 
103. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Saddharmapundarikasiitra™ 
Summary by Jan Hendrik Kern 


This is the famous "Lotus Sitra", much studied, recited and 
revered throughout Asia. Jan Hendrik Kern's translation (103.1.4) 
is preceded by the following summary of the work's chapters: 

"1. Prologue 

2. Awakening of the Lord from his mystic trance; display of his 
transcendent skilfulness, proved by the apparent trinity of vehicles, 
whereas in reality there is but one vehicle. 

3. Prophecy of the Lord regarding the future destiny of Sariputra, 
his eldest son...Parable of the burning house... 

4. Another parable. 

5. Parable of the plants and the rain, to exemplify the impartiality 
and equal care of the Lord for all creatures. Parable of the blind 
man, to intimate that the phenomena have but an apparent reality, 
and that the ultimate goal of all endeavors must be to reach all- 


242 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


knowingness, which in fact is identical with complete nescience. 

6. Sundry predictions as proofs of the power of the Sugata to 
look into the future. 

7. He has an equal knowledge of the remotest past; his 
remembrance of the turning of the wheel by the Tathagata. 

8. Prophecy regarding five hundred Arhats. 

9. Prophecy concerning Ananda, Rahula, and the two thousand 
monks. 

10. The Lord teaches how pious preachers of the law, who will 
come in after-times, ought to be duly honored, and promises that he 
will always protect the ministers of religion. 

11. Display of the miraculous power of Sakyamuni...How 
Sakyamuni in a former birth strove to acquire the Lotus of the True 
Law. 

12. Prediction to Gautami, YaSodhara, and the nuns in their train. 
Promise of the host of disciples and Bodhisattvas to take up the 
difficult task of preaching the holy word in days to come, after the 
Lord's nirvana. 

13. Vocation of the ministers of religion, and practical rules for 
their conduct in and out of society. 

14, Splendid phantasmagory of innumerable Bodhisattvas. 

15. The Buddha...reveal(s) the immense duration of his lifetime, 
in the past and the future. 

16. Meritoriousness of the belief in the immense duration of the 
Tathagatas and all those who have once become Buddhas. 

17. The Lord details the great merit attending a ready acceptance 
of the preaching of the law. 

18. Exposition of the advantages, worldly and spiritual, enjoyed 
by the ministers of religion. 

19. Story of Sadaparibhiita... 

20. Grand show exhibited by the two Tathagatas Sakyamuni and 
Prabhurata con-jointly. 

21. Efficacy of talismanic spells (dharanis). 

22. Self-sacrifice of the Bodhisattva Sarvasattvapriyadarsana, 
otherwise called Bhaisajyaguru. 

23. Visit of the Bodhisattva Gadgadaévara to the Saha-world... 

24. Grandeur and ubiquitousness of Avalokitesvara. 

25. Wonderful and edifying story of the conversion of the king 
Subhavyiha through the instrumentality of his two sons. 


SADDHARMAPUNDARIKA 243 


26. The Bodhisattva Samantabhadra charges himself with the task 
of being a protector to the preachers of religion in after-times after 
the Lord's nirvana." 


104. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Saharanagarapariprechasiitra?®> © 
105. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Samantamukhaparivartasiitra?® 
106. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Sarvapunyasamuccayasamadhisiitra?” 
107. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Sarvavaipulyavidydsiddhasiitra?® 


108. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Simhapariprechdasiitra® 


109. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Srimdladevisimhanddasiitra®” 
Summary by Alex and Hideko Wayman 


"The scripture opens in Sravasti. King Prasenajit and his Queen 
Mallika move to interest their daughter Queen Srimald in the 
Buddha's doctrine." 

"Chapter One. Eliminating All Doubts. 1. Srimala evokes the 
Buddha, who approaches in his inconceivable body. She praises his 
two bodies which are bodily form and the knowledge body. The 
Lord prophesies that Queen $rimala will attain the incomparable 
right perfected enlightenment. 2. Queen Srimala takes ten great 
vows, the first five constituting Hinayana ethics, the second five, 
Mahayana ethics..." 

"Chapter Two. Deciding the Cause. 3. Queen Srimala forms three 
reat aspirations: to always comprehend the Illustrious Doctrine; to 
teach unweariedly the Illustrious Doctrine; and to protect and 
uphold the Illustrious Doctrine without regard to body, life force, or 
possessions. These three comprise all Bodhisattva aspirations. 4. 
She prays for the Tathagata's power to make her eloquent when 
teaching in the scope of the great aspirations;..." 

"Chapter Three. Clarifying the Final Meaning. 5. The queen 
eloquently preaches the embrace of the Illustrious Doctrine that was 
held by all the Buddhas. The "Illustrious Doctrine" is a term for the 


244 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Great Vehicle...The Arhats and the Pratyekabuddhas with fear take 
refuge in the Lord. What they call "nirvana" is a means belonging to 
the Tathagatas, because the Arhats and the Pratyekabuddhas do not 
have all merits, have measurable and conceivable merit, have a 
remainder of faults, and so are far away from the nirvana-realm. 
Concerning the liberation of Arhats and Pratyekabuddhas, there are 
two kinds of passing away--discontinuous passing away of ordinary 
sentient beings, and the inconceivable transference of the Arhats, 
Pratyekabuddhas, and Bodhisattvas who have attained power. The 
Arhats and the Pratyekabuddhas have neither eliminated all 
defilements nor avoided all rebirth...The vehicles of the Disciples 
and the Self-Enlightened are included in the Great Vehicle. "Great 
Vehicle" is an expression for the Buddha vehicle, and so the three 
vehicles are counted as one vehicle (ekayana)...6. The four Noble 
Truths do not belong to the Disciples and the Self-Enlightened, for 
these persons do not have the supramundane knowledge of the non- 
progressive Noble Truths. The four Truths belong to the Tathagatas, 
who eliminate the store of all defilements by inconceivable voidness 
knowledge. 7. The Tathagatagarbha is covered by the defilements' 
store; when liberated from this store it is the Dharmakaya of the 
Tathagata...8-9. The cessation of suffering is the Tathagata’s 
Dharmakaya, or Tathagatagarbha freed from defilement by the two 
kinds of voidness knowledge of the Tathagatas, namely, the 
Tathagatagarbha is void of the stores of defilement, and the 
Tathagatagarbha is not void of the Buddha natures. 10. The Noble 
Truth "Cessation of Suffering" is the true refuge. The other three 
Noble Truths...are not the true refuge. 11-12. Immature ordinary 
persons have the wayward views of the two extremes. When they 
think "The constructions are impermanent" it is their eternalistic 
view. This is because they have four wayward ideas that the 
impermanent is permanent, suffering is pleasure, nonself is self, the 
impure is pure...13. The Tathagatagarbha is the base either of non- 
discrete constructed Buddha natures or of discrete constructed 
defilements. The Tathagatagarbha experiences suffering, is the 
reason for aspiration towards nirvana, and the reason for "cyclical 
flow" (samsdra); it is not a "self". There are two difficult doctrines: 
that consciousness is intrinsically pure, and that intrinsically pure 
consciousness can be defiled." 

"Chapter Four. Entering the One Vehicle Path. 14. By two 


SRIMALADEVISIMHANADA 245 


discipleship levels, a third with a knowledge in the precincts of the 
Dharma involving five visions, and a fourth reaching certainty in the 
two difficult doctrines, the Disciples can then enroll others in the 
Great Vehicle. 15. The queen gains eloquence for further 
explanations of the faultless meaning...As queen she converts the 
women in the capital, and as king he converts the men." 


110. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Srimatibrahmanipariprechasittra™ 
111. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Strivivartyavyakaranasiitra®? 
112. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Sumatidarikapariprechasiitra®® 


Advice issued by the Buddha to an eight-year-old girl named 
Sumati. 


113. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, 
Susthitamatidevaputrapariprechasiitra™ 


114. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Svapnanirdesasiitra®® 
115. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Tathdgatacintyaguhyanirdesasiitra®® 
116. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Tathdagatagarbhasiitra’” 
117. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Udayanavatsarajapariprechasttra*? 
118. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Upayakausalyasiitra®® 


119. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Vaiduryarajasiitra*° 


120. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Vidyutpraptapariprechasiitra™ 
121. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Viradatta(grhapati)pariprechasittra’? 
122. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Vimaladattapariprechdsiitra” 


123. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, 
Visesacinta(brahma)pariprechdsitra™ 


246 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
124. UPATISSA, Vimuttimagga 
Summary by Karl H. Potter 


We list this work here, although the evidence is not determinative 
as to this author's date. P.V. Bapat, who has published several 
articles on the topic, thinks it likely that Buddhaghosa knew of 
Upatissa's work and refers to it a number of times in his 
Visuddhimagga.*= However, he admits that Buddhaghosa's 
references may be to someone else. And of course we may be once 
again confronting an amalgam of several different works from 
different periods. There was an Upatissa Thera who apparently lived 
in the first-second century A.D., and there is a tradition that this 
work was brought to Ceylon from India. On the other hand it is also 
said that the work was composed in the Abhayagiri monastery in Sri 
Lanka, which would suggest a date in the fifth century or so. We 
place this work at the present date merely to find a way between all 
these opinions. 

The summary is based entirely on the English translation ("T") 
from the Chinese texts by N.R.M. Ehara, S. Thera and K. Thera, The 
Path of Freedom (Kandy, 1977). Since there is no text to provide 
checks for Pali equivalents, our summary necessarily depends on the 
published translation together with the foomotes suggesting 
equivalent Pali terms in some places. 


CHAPTER ONE: Introduction 


(T1-5) One who wishes to achieve nirvana should be versed in 
the stitra, vinaya and abhidharma. This is the path of freedom. 
"Freedom" has five kinds: (1) freedom of restraint, suppression of 
the passions through the practice of the first meditation; (2) 
freedom of parts, from views through meditation; (3) freedom of 
eradication, the destruction of the fetters through the path of the 
other world; (4) freedom of tranquillity, the satisfaction of one who 
obtains results; (5) freedom of escape, nirvana without residue. 

A man who acknowledges this path of freedom fulfils three 
branches (skandha): (1) of precepts, viz., right speech, right action, 
etc.; (2) of concentration, viz., right effort, right mindfulness, etc.; 
(3) of wisdom, viz., right understanding, right thought, etc. He 


VIMUTTIMAGGA 247 


should be triply trained in (1) higher virtue, (2) higher awareness, 
(3) higher wisdom. The first comes through virtue, the second 
through concentration, the third through wisdom. Through these 
one obtains purity of virtue, thought and views respectively, three 
kinds of good, and three kinds of satisfaction correspondingly. 
Having acknowledged the path of freedom a man attains the 
perfection of the middle way between the two extremes. Through 
virtue he transcends backsliding to lower realms, through 
concentration he transcends the plane of desire, through wisdom he 
transcends all becoming. If he practises virtue fully but little of the 
other two he becomes a stream-enterer and a once-returner. If-he 
practices virtue and concentration but little of wisdom he becomes 
a nonretumer. If he practises all three to the full he becomes a 
perfected being. : 


CHAPTER TWO: On Distinguishing Virtue 


(T6-38) There are three kinds of virtue--of volition, of abstention, 
of nontransgression. A long list of examples is provided. "Virtue" 
involves removal of transgressions of virtue by dignity. The three 
transgressions are transgressing the rules of the community of 
monks, transgressing of the virtues pertaining to the conditions, and 
transgressing the virtues pertaining to the senses. The former 
involves loss of faith in the Buddha through shamelessness and 
indecorum, the second involves e.g. concern with adornment of the 
body, the third involves distraction of the senses, i.e., 
nonattentiveness. 

The benefits of virtue are delineated, as well as its causes. Virtue 
may be good, bad, or indeterminate. The first is meritorious 
behavior that gives satisfaction, the second demeritorious behavior 
that gives frustration, the third is defilement-free activity that gives 
neither satisfaction nor frustration. : 

There are thirty-four factors which are obstacles to virtue. 

Now virtues are classified in Abhidharma fashion into groups of 
pairs, triplets, etc. E.g., pairs of classifications include prescriptions 
and prohibitions, abandoning what is nonvirtuous and undertaking 
what is virtuous, worldly vs. other-worldly virtue, measurable vs. 
immeasurable, limitful and limitless, dependent and nondependent, 
etc. Triplets include tarnished, nontarnished, and tranquillized 


248 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


virtue; virtue swayed by the world, swayed by the body, swayed by 
dharma, fearful, anxious, fatuous. Quadruples include 
disadvantageous, maintenance-conducive, advantageous, and 
penetration-aiding; precepts for monks, nuns, the not-yet-ordained, 
and for householders; natural virtue, virtue that is good manners, 
virtue that is law (dharma), and virtue that is the result of previous 
births; virtue of the restraints through the rules of the monastic 
order, through purity of living, through restraint of faculties, 
through conditions. 

Good behavior and misbehavior are exemplified, and these 
various virtues are clarified at length, with special attention to the 
last mentioned of the quadruples. There is a lot of specific 
information about how a monk should behave. 


CHAPTER THREE: On Distinguishing Concentration 


(139-47) Concentration is defined and its features identified. 
Four beneficial results are listed: (1) satisfying existence in this life, 
(2) enjoyment of the objects one concentrates on, (3) acquisition of 
knowledge, and (4) attainment of perfection. 

The obstacles to concentration are: lust, hatred, indolence, 
rigidity, agitation, uncertainty, delusion, absence of joy, and Dliss. 
There are eight causes of concentration: renunciation, nonhatred, 
brightness, nondisturbedness, all skilful dharmas, sustained appli- 
cation of thought, gladness, and those dharmas that arouse 
knowledge. Seven prerequisites for concentration are virtue, 
contentment, shielding of the faculties, moderation in drink and 
food, not sleeping in the first, middle and last watches of the night, 
being intent on wisdom , and a calm and quiet dwelling-place. 

Now concentration is analyzed into pairs--e.g., mundane and 
otherworldly; triplets--e.g., involving both initial and sustained 
thought, involving sustained but not initial thought, and involving 
neither; quadruples--e.g., the four realms of sensual pleasure, 
matter, immateriality and the unincluded; and quintuples--e.g., five 
kinds of concentration characterized respectively by initial thought, 
sustained thought, joy, bliss, and unification of mind. 





VIMUTTIMAGGA 249 
CHAPTER FOUR: On Approaching a Good Friend 


(T48-53) Concentration requires advice from others; so one who 
intends to practise concentration should seek out a good friend who 
can teach him or at any rate act so as to help him meditate. The 
duties of a pupil toward his teacher are set forth in detail. 


CHAPTER FIVE: Distinguishing Marks of Behavior 


(T54-62) Fourteen kinds of behavior are listed, and fourteen 
kinds of persons correspondingly. These are (1) passionate, (2) 
hating, (3) deluded, (4) faithful, (5) intelligent, (6) involving initial 
thought, (7) passionate-hating, (8) passionate-infatuated, (9) hate- 
infatuated, (10) passionate-hating-infatuated, (11) faithfully 
intelligent, (12) faithfully excogitative, (13) intelligently 
excogitative, and (14) faithfullly intelligently excogitative. These 
may be reduced to seven according to the following pairs of kinds 
of behavior becoming one: (1)-(4), (2)-(5), (3)-(6), (7)-QD, (8)- 
(12), (9)-(13) and (10)-(14). These in turn can be reduced to three 
kinds, (1), (2) and (3). 

The causes of these three kinds of behavior are, respectively, 
good karma, bad karma resulting from violence, and bad karma 
resulting from low stupid practices. Behavior has seven aspects: (1) 
related to objects, (2) related to the defilements, (3) related to 
walking, (4) related to dress, (5) related to food, (6) related to 
work, and (7) related to sleep. 


CHAPTER SIX: The Subjects of Meditation 


(T63-70) There are thirty-eight kinds of things to meditate upon. 
These include the ten symbolic meditative devices; ten meditations 
on revolting aspects of the body; ten recollections (of the Buddha, 
the dharma, the sangha, of virtue, liberality, deities, death, body, 
respiration and peace); four boundless thoughts: loving-kindness, 
compassion, sympathy, equanimity; determining of the four 
elements; perceiving the foulness of food; the sphere of nothingness; 
and the sphere of neither identification nor nonidentification. These 
thirty-eight are studied from the standpoint of meditation, of how 
each does or does not transcend form, of which ones should and can 


250 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


be increased, of which are causes of supernormal powers, of which 
ones have which kinds of objects, of the special or outstanding 
features of each, of which realms each arises in, of how each is 
grasped, and of who can and should practise each one. 


CHAPTER SEVEN: Entering the Subject of Meditation 


(T71-98) Now each of the thirty-eight subjects are explained in 
detail, beginning with the meditative devices. The ten devices are 
earth, water, fire, air, dark color, yellow, red, white, akdga and 
consciousness. The nature of meditation on each, its cause and 
results and the appropriate mandala to be constructed is explained. 
For example, meditation on the first or earth device involves 
considering the tribulations of sensual desires and the benefits of 
renouncing them. The beneficial results of this meditation include 
separation from the defilements, freedom, enjoyment of 
renunciation, the ability to endure frustration, wisdom. Then there 
follows a detailed description of just how the meditator should 
reflect, construct his mandala, gaze upon it, the afterimage that 
arises, and the sign or conditioning cause that the yogi acquires. A 
preparatory stage (access-meditation) and a concluding or fixed 
stage are distinguished. In meditating the yogin should increase 
gradually the extent of the area over which the topic (say, earth) 
extends. Various aids to skilfulness in meditation are described. 

Joy and bliss are both results of meditation. Joy is ease of mind 
arising from satisfaction of desires, from faith, from nonrigidity, 
from meditative solitude, from concentration (in the second stage), 
and from enlightenment. Bliss is contact with lovable and ease- 
giving things and persons. The difference between joy and bliss is 
that between coarse and fine. Joy belongs to the aggregate of 
conditioning factors, bliss to the aggregate of feelings. Joy is always 
accompanied by bliss, but not necessarily vice-versa. 

There are five factors that hinder and which are rooted out by 
meditation. These five are: (1) sensual interests, (2) malice, (3) 
rigidity and sleepiness, (4) agitation and regret, and (5) perplexity. 
They are rooted out by meditations of the first stage involving initial 
and sustained thought, joy, bliss and unification of mind. 

A yogi who attains the lower first meditation will be reborn into 
Brahma's retinue (brahmaparisajja) and remain there for one-third 





VIMUTTIMAGGA , 251 


of an eon. If he practises the middle-range first meditation he will 
be reborn as a chief Brahma (brahmapurohita) and will remain 
there for half an eon. If he practises the higher first meditation he 
will be reborn as a great Brahma (mahdabrahma) and will live as 
such for a whole eon. The possibility of backsliding is admitted, and 
several opinions about that matter are briefly reviewed. 

(T99-104) But the first meditation also still contains the seeds of 
distraction by the hindrances, so that one's meditation may become 
coarse. This leads the yogi on to practise the second meditation. 
This has four factors: (1) it involves the stilling of both initial and 
sustained thought, (2) involves internal tranquillity and mind- 
predominance, (3) is born of concentration, (4) is full of joy and 
bliss. One who practises the lower second meditation will be reborn 
in the abode of lesser light and live there for two eons. One who 
practises the middling second meditation will be reborn in the 
abode of measureless light and stay for four eons. And if he 
practises the higher second meditation he will be reborn in the 
abode of resplendence and live for eight eons there. 

(T104-109) But the yogi may well find even the second 
meditation coarse and strive for the third meditation. The second 
meditation still contains the seeds of distraction through initial and 
sustained thought, and may involve attachment to joy; it does not 
yet provide supernormal powers. So one seeks the third meditative 
stage where one becomes free from joy and dwells instead in 
equanimity. Eight varieties of equanimity are distinguished. These 
are then reclassified into six and again into three--equanimity as a 
vehicle of concentration, as a state of little activity, as inactivity. In 
this third meditation one abides in equanimity, mindful and 
completely conscious. Mindfulness is remembering everything; 
complete consciousness is being rightly aware of one's distinctive 
marks and of worldly conditions. Of course, mindfulness and 
consciousness are required in the previous meditations also, but in 
this third one joy, bliss and other meditative factors are stilled and 
only mindful complete consciousness persists. 

(T109-113) Still, joy and bliss remain tempting even in the 
third meditation which has so recently overcome them. Thus the 
yogi may strive for the fourth meditation, where one's mindfulness 
is clarified and purified by equanimity, so that there is no receiving 
or rejecting of inputs that ordinarily occasion thought and result in 


252 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


satisfaction or frustration. Such a meditator is reborn in heaven. 

(T113-116) Up to this point the meditator has been concentrating 
on earth and others of the meditative. devices up to akasa. Now, 
wishing to transcend the material realm, he may concentrate on 
akaga and become freed from any awareness of diversity, so that no 
perceptions take place, and thus accordingly no feelings, no traces, 
no (finite) consciousness. One who meditates thus will be reborn 
in the sphere of akaga and remain there for 2,000 eons. 

(T116-117) Now the yogin wishes to transcend even the sphere 
of dkaga and to attain the sphere of infinite consciousness. So he 
meditates on consciousness, and is reborn in that sphere and 
remains there for 4,000 eons. 

(T117-118) Next he wishes to transcend even the sphere of 
infinite consciousness and achieve the sphere of nothingness. So he 
goes beyond consciousness altogether to the sphere of nothingness, 
which is empty. He is reborn there and his life there will be 6,000 
eons. 

(T118-120) Finally, he wishes to transcend even the sphere of 
nothingness and achieve the concentration of neither perception nor 
nonperception. This final concentration achieves all the merits of the 
previous ones and none of their defects. He is reborn there and 
remains for 84,000 eons. But even by this remarkable meditation he 
is not able to destroy the defilements (and so is not liberated even 
thus). Why are the defilements not destroyed? Because one who 
separates himself from perception is not able to see the path, and 
one in this state of neither perception nor nonperception is not able 
to discern the nature of that state, which discernment is required for 
the path. 

(1121-132) The foregoing review of various stages of meditation 
has been predicated on the assumption that the meditator started 
meditating on earth. But he can also meditate on the other seven 
meditative devices. The particular marks, benefits and results of 
meditating on each are distinguished. Meditation on space and on 
consciousness were alluded to above. 

(T132-140) The ten meditations on revolting aspects of the body 
are now explained. These include (1) the bloatedness of a corpse, 
(2) its discoloration, (3) its festering, (4) its being cracked, (5) 
gnawed, (6) dismembered, (7) cut and dismembered, (8) 
bloodstained, (9) full of worms, and (10) its practically skeletal 


VIMUTTIMAGGA 253 


condition. The marks, benefits and results of meditating on each are 
distinguished. ; ; 

(T140-148) Now recollection of the Buddha is explained. 
Eighteen benefits of this meditation are distinguished, including 
such things as increase of confidence, mindfulness, wisdom, 
reverence, merit, joy, fearlessness, etc. How such epithets as 
"perfected", "sublime", "omniscient" (i.e., "knower of the world ), 
etc., apply to the Buddha are carefully explained. The Buddha's ten 
powers, fourteen kinds of knowledge, and eighteen virtues are laid 
om (149-180) Similarly, the other nine recollections are discussed. 
The recollection of virtue conduces to morality on the part of the 
meditator; the. recollection of liberality leads to his giving; the 
recollection of deities leads to the acquisition of the merits of the 
gods and earns a life in heaven like theirs. Recollection of 
respiration is the breath-control of the yogi; it is explained in 
generous detail, showing how control of each kind of breath 
contributes to enlightenment. Recollection of death involves full 
awareness of the ways of dying and the psychological states that 
may accompany thought of death. Various ways of summarizing the 
pertinent features of the body are outlined for the one who 
recollects the body, including a lengthy section on the 80,000 
worms that gnaw on the body. 

(T181-197) Continuing the detailed description of the thirty-eight 
subjects of meditation, the discussion turns now to the four 
immeasurable thoughts. 

(T197-208) This section discusses each of the four elements-- 
earth, fire, water and air--as well as the meditation on foulness of 
food. 


CHAPTER EIGHT: The Higher Knowledge 


(T209-228) Having gotten to this point, the meditator in the 
fourth meditative stage has gained the five forms of higher 
knowledge: supernatural power, divine ear, knowledge of others’ 
thoughts, recollection of former lives, divine vision. Supernatural 
powers are divided into three, and then into seven. The former 
classification is used in what follows: it divides supernatural powers 
into (1) that of resolve, which enables the yogi to become many or 


254 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


one at will, to become invisible, to fly or walk on water, to handle 
the sun and the moon; (2) that of transformation, by which he can 
make his body light and pliant and less of a load on his mind, by 
which he can change his body into another form--e.g., that of a boy, 
or a lion, or an army; (3) that caused by mind, by which he can 
create things, e.g., other bodies to occupy when visiting the world 
of Brahma. By divine hearing he can hear sounds far away or 
beyond human capacity to hear. Knowing others' thoughts is self- 
explanatory, but the yogi practises it by first entering the light 
device, discovering his own heart's color through divine sight, 
learning thereby to know his own states of consciousness, and then 
using these methods to understand others. The memory of past 
lives enables the yogi to recall the order of his previous lives, the 
kinds of bodies they were in, and thus to condition his future births. 
Divine sight operates through the light kasina and enables the yogi 
to see objects far away, beyond normal human ability to see, for 
example, mental objects, as well as past and future things, things 
like karma which aren't normally seen. All five of these powers are 
gradually developed by the yogi, and the greatest powers are 
achieved by the most enlightened ones, culminating in the Buddha 
himself. 


CHAPTER NINE: Wisdom 


(1229-236) Wisdom is seeing things as they are. It is here 
classified into a pair (worldly and otherworldly), several triplets, 
and goodly number of quadruples, mostly distinguished according 
to the subject-matter over which the knowledge ranges. 


CHAPTER TEN: Five Methods 


(1237-282) The five methods of acquiring wisdom are these: (1) 
the method of the aggregates, (2) the method of the senses, (3) the 
method of the elements, (4) the method of dependent origination, 
(S) the method of truth. The aspects of material aggregates, viz., the 
senses and elements, are identified, as well as the thirty kinds of 
matter derived from the elements. These last are classified briefly 
according to their origin, their groups (kalapa), whether they arise 
at the moment of birth, and then by twos, threes and fours. 


VIMUTTIMAGGA 255 


Following this, the other four aggregates are explained. This is 
followed in turn by an explanation of dependent origination and of 
the four noble truths. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN: On Discerning Truth 


(T283-326) The progressive methods of the yogi who practises 
the method of truth are set forth, illustrated by a number of similes. 
Since he has understood the four truths he realizes the rise and fall 
of the aggregates, which leads him on to appreciating how the 
aggregates break up, that they are impermanent, and this in turn 
leads him to fear birth. A result of that fear is the desire for 
liberation, which leads the yogi to adaptive knowledge, i.e., 
enlightenment, which sows the seeds of nirvana. After this he 
practises the path, enters the stream and cuts off the three fetters of 
wrongly viewing the body as the self, doubt, and addiction to rites 
and ceremonies, along with the proclivities resulting therefrom. 
During this stage he gradually achieves the status of once-returner, 
nonreturner, and arhat. 

The work concludes with a brief review of an assortment of 
traditional classifications such as three liberations, one hundred and 
thirty four defilements, four contaminants, four floods, four knots, 
five obstructions, nine kinds of pride, ten defilements, ten fetters, 
and a description of the result of this path, viz., the dissolution of 
perception and feeling that is neither identification nor 
nonidentification. 


125.AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Atandtikasiitra®"* 
126.HARIVARMAN, Tattvasiddhi>"” 
Summary by Karl H. Potter 
The work is also known as "Satyasiddhi”, but that is no longer the 
preferred translation. The date of its composition is estimated by 
Etienne Lamotte as 253 A.D., which has been accepted by other 
P’ 


scholars. It appears to present the persuasions of the Bahusgrutiya 
school. 


256 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


"E" references are to the edition by N. Aiyaswami Sastri and "T" 
references are to Sastri's translation.2® This summary has been 
prepared on the basis of T, but with the help of the unpublished 
doctoral dissertation of Shoryu Katsura, which is referred to as "K". 


BOOK ONE 
CHAPTER ONE: The Three Jewels 
Section A: The Buddha 


1.(E1-6; T1-4) After a salutation, the author indicates that, 
having studied the opinions of others, he will in this work clarify the 
actual meaing of the Tripitaka. The Buddha is worthy of salutation 
because, though a human being, he is omniscient concerning the 
essential natures of all the factors, he is free from all bad features 
and has all the good ones, and he seeks the good of all beings. 
Though others have the five aggregates of factors listed below, the 
Buddha's are purer. These five aggregates of factors are (1) moral 
precepts, (2) concentration, (3) wisdom, (4) liberation, and (5) 
knowledge. (1) Morality is good conduct. (2) The Buddha's 
concentration is superior to that of others, for it is firm, does not 
depend on causal conditions and so is continuous, undistracted, 
such that he can possess the supernatural powers, has full 
understanding of the meditations so that he can enter and leave any 
of them. (3) His insight has destroyed the twofold ignorance which 
hides meditation and produces defilements. (4) Thus, he is 
liberated from that twofold ignorance. (5) He has knowledge and 
vision of that liberation, and can teach anyone according to his 
needs. 

2.(E7-10; T5-7) Ten powers that the Buddha has in accordance 
with his insight are: (1) knows what exists and what doesn't, 
through understanding the causal, directly antecedent and dominant 
conditions of every single thing; (2) discerns all attitudes produced 
by factors--(a) frustrating now but causing satisfying results, (b) 
satisfying now but producing frustrating results, (c) satisfying here 
and producing satisfying results, (d) frustrating here and producing 





TATTVASIDDHI 257 


frustrating results; (3) discerns the effects of all meditations, 
liberations, concentrations and trances; (4) can distinguish people 
with keen faculties from those with dull ones; (5) understands the 
variety of resolves; (6) understands the variety of realms; (7) 
understands all modes of progress; (8) knows which are the results 
of which previous actions; (9) sees the future with his divine eye; 
(10) understands the stoppage of the contaminants. 

3.(E11-15; T7-11) The four confidences are (1) omniscience, (2) 
destruction of all contaminants, (3) prophecy of the obstructions to 
the path, and (4) knowledge of the path that destroys frustrations. 
These are "fearlessnesses" because they result from the powers 
detailed in the previous section. 

Objection: Why should we believe in the Buddha's omniscience? 
After all, he says various things suggesting he seeks understanding, 
such as "where do you come from?", and there are passages which 
suggest the Buddha was sometimes greedy and proud. Finally, the 
Buddha says that sex is an obstruction to the path, but some people 
who practise the path enjoy sex. 

Answer: The Buddha talks in worldly fashion in order to teach. 
As for sex, one who is on the path is not necessarily free from 
obstructions. 

4.(E15-17; T11-13) Ten naines of the Buddha. 

5.(E17-19; T13-15) The Buddha does not guard any actions of 
body, speech or mind, since he has no misdeeds to guard from 
others. 


Section B. The Dharma 


6.(E20-22; T15-17) The virtues in the Buddha's dharma. 
7.(E22-25; T17-20) More virtues. 
8.(E25-27; T20-23) Twelve branches of the discourse. 


Section C.The Order 


9.(E27-29; T23-24) Primary purity of the order. 

10.(E29-34; T24-28) The four main kinds of noble ones are (1) 
progressing, (2) stream-enterer, (3) once-returner, (4) nonreturner. 
(1) is divided into (a) faith-followers, (b) followers of the dharma, 
and (c) signless followers, i.e., faith-followers and dharma-followers 


258 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


that have entered the path and understood the third noble truth. 

There are eight kinds of nonreturner: (a) he who will obtain 
liberation immediately after death, (b) the one who turns away 
from the world and enters liberation, (c) he who spontaneously 
enters liberation, (d) he who does so with effort, (e) those in higher 
streams, (f) those in the immaterial realm, (g) one who enter 
neither the material nor immaterial realms, (h) the one who enters 
liberation in this very body. This last, (h), has two kinds: (1) 
liberated by faith and (2) having attained vision. 

There is a classification of nine kinds of noble ones. 

11.(E35-37; T28-29) The Field of Merit. 

12.(E37; T29-30) Mangala 


CHAPTER TWO: Justification of the Composition of This Text 


13.(E38-40; T30-32) The Buddha's dharma is now going to be 
made known. 

Objecton: If the Buddha has already made it known no 
elucidation is needed. If he hasn't, since his meaning is obscure, no 
elucidation is possible. And the obscurity of his meaning is evident 
from the variety of opinions about it; even he himself said that no 
one understood it (in Parapravadasitra). 

Answer: There are both noble and ordinary ways of discerning 
the meaning of others. Even in the Parapravddasiitra the Buddha 
implies that Katyayana and others have understood his subtlest 
meaning, and endorsed what others preached in his name. And the 
Buddha also advised the monks to compose a Buddhist system. 

14.(E40-45; T32-35) The following are principles on which our 
system is based: (1) the distinction between the worldly and the 
highest, e.g., that there is a self from the worldly standpoint, but no 
self from the highest standpoint; (2) distinction between a principle 
of the teaching and ordinary usage; (3) matter exists in all the three 
times; (4) not all the senses are causal conditions in the awareness 
of every factor; (5) rules have exceptions; (6) the distinction 
between matters that are unconditionally the case versus those 
which are only conditionally the case; (7) the distinction between 
artifical and natural; (8) reference to X is to be understood as 
including what is proximate to X; (9) reference to X is to be 
understood as including what is similar to X; (10) generalizations 


TATTVASIDDHI 259 


can be made in accordance with a majority of cases; (11) reference 
to causes through mentioning their effect; (12) reference to effects 
through mentioning their causes. 

15.(E45-49; T35-37) Commendation of Sastra 

16.(E49-52; T37-39) Fourfold Dharma 

17.(E52-57;T39-44)>"° Various standard Buddhist classifica-tions 
(matrka) of the four truths are summarized. Under the first truth, 
for example, we have: three realms, four stations of consciousness, 
four kinds of birth, four foods, six paths, six elements, six contacts, 
seven stations of consciousness, eight worldly factors, nine abodes 
of beings, and a fivefold classification into five aggregates, twelve 
senses, eighteen elements, twenty-two parts of the chain of 
dependent origination and twenty-five faculties. Similar lists are 
provided for the other three truths. Explanations of constituent 
terms are brief. 

18.(E58-64; T45-48) A series of classifications of things into 
pairs, triples, quadruples, etc.>*° 


CHAPTER THREE: Ten Points of Controversy 


19.(E67-69; T48-51)*? Some say that past and future factors 
exist, and define "existence" as being a content of awareness. But we 
are aware of all sorts of things that don't exist--the contents of false 
judgments, the double-moon. 

Objection: No. Consciousness arises only in dependence on an 
existent locus and an existent supporting object, never without 
them. Because, e.g., if consciousness could lack an object it might 
arise at any time and there would be no liberation; too, doubt could 
never arise about such a consciousness, since there would be no 
content of the awareness to doubt. Scripture attests that factors are 
objects; if it is knowledge its claim of the existence of its object must 
be correct; if it's correct, it's not knowledge. 

Answer: The response is mistaken. Awarenesses and their 
accompanying factors may arise without supporting objects, for they 
do not grasp the highest reality, and because factors are not 
ultimately real. Of course any awareness arises supported by causal 
conditions, but it doesn't follow that it arises from the content of the 
awareness as presented. To say so would be to court the view that 
the effect preexists in the cause. And if the yogi understands one 


260 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


thing (an existent) as another (a nonexistent) his awareness is 
erroneous. As for the double moon, this supports our contention. 
Thus your definition of existence as a content of awareness is 
mistaken. 

20.(E69-71; 152-53) Objection: Factors are grouped as 
aggregates, elements and senses, so they must exist. 

Answer: That follows from ordinary usage, but not from the point 
of view of the dharma. If what you say were true, unconditioned 
things should exist, but they do not. Therefore the aggregates, etc., 
may be nonexistent. 

Objection: To be is to be perceived, i.e., to be believed in on the 
basis of perceptual awareness. 

Answer: It is a conceptual construction and not what is 
experienced. The sutra tells us to resort to jfidna, not to vijfiana. 
Things such as matter, etc., which have essential natures are not the 
contents of experience. 

Objection: A thing exists if it is connected with existence. 

Answer: Nothing is connected with another thing. Everything 
comes from causes and conditions, so their existence is constructed, 
not experienced, worldly, not ultimately real. 

There are ten points of controversy to be considered: 

(1) Do the past and future exist? We say no, because past and 
future factors have no function and so do not exist. If a thing has no 
function, it has no self-nature. All factors arise from causes and 
conditions; since past and future factors have no causes and 
conditions, they can't exist. If future factors did exist they would be 
eternal, and thus wouldn't be created. And only present and 
conditioned factors have the three characteristics of arising, ending 
and change. 

21.(E71-72; T53-54) Objection: Past and future factors do exist, 
because factors exist if awarenesses arise about them, as you admit 
is the case with present factors and unconditioned ones. Too, the 
Buddha taught that there are past and future factors. Past karma 

has results, so must exist. Again, mental consciousness 
(manovijfiana) depends on the mind, which is past; if there were 
neither past nor future factors, what could be the object of mental 
consciousness? 
22.(E72-74; T54-56) Answer: We've already answered your first 
point. The Buddha was speaking to ordinary folk, not the ultimate 


TATTVASIDDHI 261 


truth. Even though they have results, past deeds (karma) do not 
now exist. And mental consciousness does not really depend on the 
mind in the way visual awareness depends on the eye; mental 
consciousness is merely occasioned by the previous awareness. So 
past and future factors are only believed in by ignorant men. 

23.(E74-75; T56-57) (2) Some say that everything exists, e.g., 
(the Sarvastivadins, who say) that-the twelve senses are taught by 
the Buddha and include everything, or (the Vaisesikas, who say) 
that there are six categories--substance, quality, motion, universal, 
individuator, inherence, or (the Samkhyas, who say) that there is 
prakrti. But all thesé things are nonexistent. And anyway, existence 
is defined in different ways by different schools. That all exists, or 
that nothing exists, are taught only as an expedient, in order to 
preach the middle way between those extremes of eternalism and 
nihilism. 

24.(E75-76; T57-58) (3) Some say there is an intermediate 
existence between death and rebirth. 

25.(E76-78; T58-59) Others deny such an existence, interpreting 
the Buddha's words differently. The Buddha was speaking about the 
existence of another world, not of an intermediate state. And 
anyway, the intermediate state is a kind of rebirth itself. 

Objection: The intermediate state is the entering of consciousness 
into the embryo. 

Answer: But since it is karma which occasions this entering as 
well as the rebirth in the body, postulation of two rebirths (one in 
the intermediate state, the other in the body) is unnecessarily 
complex.*?? 

26.(E78-79; T59-60) (4) Some say that understanding of the four 
noble truths is gradual, citing the Buddha.*” 

27.(E79-80; T60-61) Others®™ say that understanding is sudden, 
reinterpreting some of the passages cited and questioning others. 
But for the yogi there is only one truth (not four), and the gaining 
of the path is the result of visualizing that one truth, namely, the 
truth of the cessation of frustration. 

28.(E80-81; T61) (5) Some say that a perfected being may 
relapse out of that state, citing siitras.°* 

29.(E81-83; T51-63) Others*® say that a perfected being cannot 
fall from that state, though he may regress from a higher state of 
meditation to a lower one. 


262 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Objection: Godhika is said to have fallen six times from liberation 
and to have committed suicide. If he merely fell from meditation 
he would not have committed suicide. 

Answer: A perfected being achieves purity by meditation, and 
once having achieved it, he cannot lose it. 

30.(E84; T63-64) (6) Some*”” say that awareness is naturally 
pure and becomes sullied by accidental impurities. This is wrong,° 
for the defilements are in awareness and do not intrude from 
elsewhere. Awareness exists only for a moment, so nothing can 
intrude into it. When the Buddha says awareness is pure he is 
warning men against supposing that it persists, because if they 
supposed that a persisting awareness were naturally impure they 
would not attempt to purify it. 

31.(E85; T64-65) (7) Some*” say that the proclivities are 
associated with awareness, since attachments to interests, etc., are 
expressions of the defilements which are associated with the 
proclivities. The view that the proclivities are dissociated from 
awareness and form the cause of the arising of the fetters which are 
associated with awareness**° is wrong. A siitra says that the fetters 
arise from ignorance, etc., not from concomitants. And proclivities 
are not the cause of the arising of the fetters, since bodily and vocal 
actions satisfy your definition of "proclivity" and yet are not 
considered to be proclivities. If they are so considered, the result 
would arise not from previous deeds but from present acts alone. 

32.(E86; T6S) (8) Kasyapiya: The only deeds that exist in the 
past are those which have not yet come to fruition. 

Answer: Everything past, including karma, disappears after 
performing its causal function. 

33.(E86-87; T65-66) (9) The view that the Buddha is included in 
the order is wrong.>? 

34.(E87-90; T67-69) (10) The Vatsiputriyas say there is a person 
(pudgala); others rightly deny it on grounds of scriptural authority, 
here reviewed. 

35.(E90-95; T69-74) Objection: A person exists, because it is a 
wrong view to deny that he who acts gets the fruit of his actions. 
Further, the Buddha had many previous lives. That the person is a 
mere name is wrong. The person is the five aggregates collectively, 
and it is this that reaps the reward of its actions in the past. 
Otherwise many factors mentioned in Buddhism, such as the 


Sper 


ator ib 


TATTVASIDDHI 263 


foundations, the liberations, wouldn't exist. 

Answer: The person has nominal existence only. The Buddha 
expressly denied that there is anything which underlies the changing 
aggregates. It is awareness which has the defilements, not a person; 
there is no persisting thing that has them. The five aggregates are 
spoken of as persisting, but that is only a manner of speaking. 
When we say the person is nominal we do not mean that it doesn't 
exist, but rather that there is no such actual entity. 

Vatsiputriya: The person cannot be said to be either the same as 
or different from the aggregates, any more than fire and fuel can be 
said to be the same as or different from each other. 

Answer: This is doubtful, since the analogy itself is dubious. What 
is fire, and what fuel? Depending on how these terms are defined, 
they will be the same or different. 


BOOK TWO: The Frustration Truth 
CHAPTER ONE: Matter 


36.(E96-97; T75-76) This entire work explicates the nature of the 
"truths", i.e., the four noble truths of frustration, its origin, its 
cessation and the path to that. Frustration is the five appropriating 
aggregates. Its origin is from defilements and karma. Its cessation 
is its destruction, and the path has eight members. 

What are termed the four great elements--earth, water, fire and 
wind--depend on what are really the four great elements, namely 
color, smell, taste and touch. And the five sense-organs are 
produced from the contact of the (so-called) great elements (earth, 
water, fire and wind). 

The aggregate of color, etc., when dominated by hardness, is 
called "earth". When dominated by moisture it is "water", when 
dominated by heat "fire", and when dominated by lightness and 
movement, "air". 

37.(E98-99; T76) There is no other matter than these four. They 
are nominal existents. A great element is called "great" because it is 
pervasive and gross. It is without shape, not spatially located. 
Awarenesses and accompanying mental factors are not “great” 
because they are invisible. 


264 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


38.(E99-101; T76-78) The Samkhyas say that color, etc., are 
themselves the great elements, whereas the Vaiesikas say the great 
elements exist independently of color, etc. The correct view is that 
they are nominal, being derived from color, etc. All things which are 
derived are nominal. 

39.(E101-103; T78-79) Objection: In Abhidharma it is said that 
since earth has the property of hardness, water of moisture, etc., 
these great elements must be substantial, not nominal, for what is 
only nominally existent cannot produce a factor. In the siitras each 
great element is said to have two properties--e.g., earth has solidity 
and what is related to solidity, water viscidity and what is related 
to viscidity, etc. The suggestion is that solidity and viscidity are 
properties of actual entities, what is related to solidity or to viscidity 
are nominal entities. Indeed, it is stated in the Abhidharma that 
each is the sense of configuration whereas the earth element has the 
mark solidity. The Buddha said that solidity and what is related to 
solidity in the eyeball is earth, viscidity and what is related to 
viscidity there is water, etc. The Buddha does not speak of the 
locus of air; therefore, air must be a substance. Furthermore, if the 
great elements were nominal, anything that is hard would be earth, 
anything moist water, etc. But water is sometimes hard, clay is 
moist, and so forth. So those elements are not merely nominal 
entities. Finally, the great elements are produced simultaneously and 
are inseparable. A siitra says that matter is made of all four great 
elements. But this is inconsistent with the theory that the great 
elements are merely nominal. 

40-41.(E103-111; T79-87) Answer: The previous Abhidharma 
arguments are wrong. The first argument, that solidity, etc. are 
Properties arising from the great elements, is wrong since those 
items arise from other causes, viz., actions and defilements. 

Objection: Even so, the great elements form part of the causes of 
the arising of color and solidity, along with karma. 

Answer: Some things arise without any causes, e.g., the great 
deluge at the beginning or end of a kalpa. A god can bring 
something about just by thinking of it. So sometimes added causal 
factors to karma are needed, and sometimes not. And since both 
color and solidity arise simultaneously, why do you think the color 
arises on the basis of the solidity and not vice versa? 

Opponent: A lamp and its light arise simultaneously; nevertheless 


TATTVASIDDHI 265 


the light is based in the lamp and not vice versa. 

Answer: They are the same thing. A lamp is composed of color 
(light) and touch faculties. So the example is inappropriate. 

Opponent: But the light is found outside the lamp. 

Answer: If so, it would be experienced independently of the lamp. 
And anyway, the causal factors which give rise to a thing must be 
of the same form as the effect. Therefore color comes from matter, 
which is of the same form as it, rather than from the great elements, 
which are of a different form. 

Opponent: Scorpions arise from dungheaps, a cause of a different 
form. 

Answer: Some of the causal conditions may be of a different 
form: what we are saying is that among those conditions there must 
be some of the same form. 

You said that the’ four "great elements are produced 
simultaneously and are inseparable." But it is not so. There is only 
color and hot touch in sunbeams; some things are without taste, 
e.g., a diamond; gold and silver do not smell; the moon lacks heat, 
etc. 

Objection: These qualities of the elements you list are specifically 
activated by external conditions. E.g., gold possesses fluidity which 
may be activated when fire is present, grass possesses mobility 
which may be activated by wind. So the essential natures of things 
are activated by conditions, and if they lack such natures how could 
they be activated? 

Answer: If that were so, air would have smell. If the great 
elements were inseparable the effect would be in its cause, which is 
contrary to Buddhist belief. 

Your argument that solidity is a property of an actual entity while 
what is derived from solidity is of a nominal entity is wrong. 
Arguments from ordinary usage cannot be cited as authority, or else 
many Buddhist theses (e.g., the twelve senses) would turn out to be 
false. Anyway, why do you assume that "element" indicates 
substantiality and not a nominal nature? 

The passage you cited, in which the Buddha speaks of the 
hardness in the eyeball, is intended to show that the eyeball is a 
product of the four great elements and thus nonexistent because 
merely nominal, generated by conceptual construction. 

The reason the Buddha does not speak of a locus for air 


266 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


corresponding to solidity for earth, moisture for water, etc., is 
because lightness is not really comparable to those but is indeed a 
property of air. 

Moisture is water, and solidity earth, so nothing else than earth 
can be solid, nothing else but water moist. And it is not the case 
that all four great elements are produced simultaneously--e.g., in 
sunlight there is only color and heat. Otherwise the unwanted 
theory that the effect preexists in the cause will follow, since every 
entity will have within it all properties and there will be no point to 
a classification into four elements. 

41-43.(E111-113; T86-87) Objection: You say that the collection 
of color, etc., dominated by solidity is earth, and therefore earth is 
a nominal entity. But that is wrong, for solidity is not a factor, since 
(1) something may be now hard, later soft; (2) solidity is a notion 
derived from atoms being more or less closely packed. 

Answer: (1) We do not accept that an actual something--say, a 
lump of clay--may be now hard, later soft, because we don't accept 
a lump of clay as substantially existent, only as nominally so. (2) 
Granted it derives from closeness or looseness, still solidity exists, 
and since it is experienced (3) doesn't cut any ice. (4) Sweetness, 
though relative, exists, as does shortness, etc. (5) We don't see 
solidity, rather we infer it, from prior associations between touch 
and sight. 

Solidity, etc., are substantial existents because they produce 
constructive awarenesses. If solidity didn't exist, what could be 
constructed? Furthermore, it is experienced conceptually. 

44.(E113-117; T87-91) Question: Is hail solid water or fluid 
earth? Is gold fluid earth or solid water? 

Answer: Solidity is the specific characteristic of earth, fluidity of 
water. 

Objection: But solid gold loses its solidity when heated, and 
water loses its fluidity when frozen; so those can't be their specific 
characteristics. 

Answer: No solid thing becomes fluid, no fluid thing becomes 
solid. Rather, what is solid causes fluidity, and what is fluid causes 
solidity. Solidity is another name of earth, fluidity of water. 

Objection: But fluidity is a visible quality of water, so it is not 
another name for the water itself. 

Answer: True, fluidity is water's functioning, while moisture is a 





TATTVASIDDHI 267 


mark of water. Likewise, light weight is a mark of air, while 
movement (samudirana) is its function. 

Objection: Since everything is momentary there can be no 
movement. 

Answer: Ours is a worldly classification, not ultimately true. 
Indeed, really what is called motion is the arising of something 
different in a contiguous place. 

Objection: Lightness is not a fixed thing (i.e., it is relative). 

Answer: But it exists in dependence on awareness, as does 
heaviness. If one cited relativity as a reason against existence lots 
of evidently existent things would have to be denied existence. And 
in any case, light weight is not a relative notion; rather, air is 
unweighable. (Further discussion about relative weight.) 

45.(E117-120; T91-94)**? Question: Are the sense-organs the 
same as the four great elements or not? 

Answer: The sense-organs are formed from karma out of the 
great elements, so they are also nominal entities. For the Buddha 
said that a thing formed on the basis of a nominal entity is itself 
nominal. 

46.(E120-121; T94-95) Question: If the five sense-organs each 
have the same amount of each great element, why does one grasp 
visual data, another gustatory, etc.? 

Answer: Because of different karma being manifest through them. 

Question: Then why are five sense-organs needed? Consciousness 
alone produced by karma should be able to grasp any object. 

Answer: Well, we just find in the world that visual cognition 
doesn't arise without eyes, etc. 

Question: Then why isn't that true also of awareness, i.e., mental 
awareness? Awareness does not require any organ--it depends on 
the immediately preceding awareness only. 

Answer: Well, that's the way it is. 

Question: But if mental consciousness is not based in any organ, 
where is it located? 

Answer: It depends on embodiment, but it isn't located at any 
particular location. 

47.(E121-123; T95-97) The Tirthikas say that the five sense- 
organs are produced from five great elements. But that is not 
ultimately correct, since there is no such element as dkasadhatu. 
They also say that the reason why the eye grasps visual data is 


268 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


because it is helped by the presence of external light, say, from a 
lamp, or the sun. That is also incorrect. Sometimes external light 
is required, other times not--e.g., owls and cats don't require 
external light to see. 

There is also the (Nyaya-Vaisesika) notion that the visual organ 
contacts an object through its ray going out to the surface of the 
object. But there is no such ray. The sense-organs are impermanent 
and cannot travel. And akasa, having no form, cannot be contacted 
in this way. 

Some teachers hold that each sense-organ has a single essential 
nature grasping just one quality, so that in earth there is only smell, 
which is grasped by the olfactory organ, in water there is only taste 
grasped by the gustatory organ, etc. But this is incorrect, since other 
things smell besides earth, and because the great elements 
intermingle. Otherwise, e.g., one could only taste cool sensations 
(of water) and not hot ones (which arise from fire), etc. 

48.(E124-128; T97-101)** Only consciousness cognizes, not the 
sense-organs. 

Objection: The organ illuminates a thing, and consciousness 
makes it known. 

Answer: No. The ear doesn't illuminate anything. Even if we 
suppose it does, there will be an infinite regress problem: for the 
organ to illuminate something will require another (external) 
illuminator, which will require another one, etc. ad infinitum. 
When it is said that the eye sees (i.e., cognizes) what is meant is 
that it supports consciousness. 

Objection: A stitra says that the internal organ (manas) is the 
gate for cognizing dharma, so it must cognize objects. 

Answer: That internal organ is, in fact, an awareness (citta) 
which, having disappeared in the previous moment, cannot cognize 
anything. But the Buddha frequently followed ordinary usage when 
he spoke, and spoke of the eyes seeing, etc. 

Anyway, on your own (apparently, Samkhya) view the sense- 
organ does not think, and cognition does not depend on the senses, 
since awareness, ego, etc. are produced before the sense-organs are. 
Though, since there isn't any primordial materiality, those things 
don't exist either. 

49.(E128-1340 T101-106) Nyaya-Vaisesika: There must be 
contact between organ and object; otherwise, why shouldn't there 


TATTVASIDDHI 269 


be visual awareness of everything? It is because the organ doesn't 
go everywhere. Your siitra also speaks of the impingement 
(pratigha) of organ on object. As for the other senses, it is likewise 
there too. A sound is only heard when it reaches the auditory organ. 
Even the internal organ goes to its object according to your own 
siitra. Thus, all organs function through contacting their objects. 

Answer: Your theory involves the assumption of a ray for visual 
sensation, but that assumption is wrong. If there were such a ray 
which issued forth when one doubts whether a distant object is a 
man or a post, then the doubt couldn't be explained. Again, things 
too close are not seen. And why does the ray grasp gross things but 
not subtle ones? And anyway, we don't see any such ray. 

Objection: During the day the ray is rendered invisible by being 
covered by the sun's rays, and during the night there is no external 
light so it is not seen. 

Answer: You asked why there shouldn't be visual awareness of 
everything. It is because what is seen is within the scope of 
awareness. And when is that so? When there is contiguity between 
the visual organ and color. 

Objection: If the organ does not go to the object, what is this 
contiguity? 

Answer: Here there is nothing to choose between our views. On 
your view the organ goes to the object and sometimes sees it and 
sometimes doesn't. On our view the organ stays, where it sees what 
is in its scope and doesn't see what is not. Factors are listed which 
preclude an object from falling within the scope of visual awareness- 
-(1) being past or future, (2) being overcome by a more powerful 
light (the stars in the daytime), (3) being appropriate to another 
meditational stage, (4) lack of external light, (5) supernatural 
powers, the body of a ghost (bhiita), (6) thick covering, such as the 
color of the mountain's surface, (6) too far away, (8) too near, (9) 
the object's not being reached, e.g., the atoms outside the sun's rays, 
(10) being too subtle, (11) homogeneity, e.g., one crow in a flock 
of crows, (12) defects in the sense organs. 

Visual defects include: when affected by wind one sees colors, 
when by heat one sees flames, by cold one sees cold colors and 
water, when going without sleep one sees things blurred, when the 
mind is tired one fails to discern an object, seeing a double moon, 
seeing things occasioned by ghosts, ugliness occasioned by demerit, 


270 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


beautiful things occasioned by merit, when affected by bile one sees 
flames, when veiled by darkness one does not see at all. Similar 
defects can be found affecting the other senses. 

There is also a list given of things which do not fall within the 
range of awareness, as well as a list of defects of awareness such as 
distraction, perversion, pride, drunkenness, anger, etc. 

You said our stitra speaks of impingement. But there is no such 
impingement. What explains "impingement" is contiguity. 

50.(E134-138; T106-110) You argued (at the beginning of the 
previous Chapter) that a sound reaches the auditory organ. But 
there are alternative explanations for one's. not hearing a softly 
spoken word other than sound reaching or failing to reach his 
auditory organ. There are also difficulties in the notion of sound- 
waves, notably that no appropriate example of analogous sorts of 
waves can be found. Furthermore, being momentary it cannot 
produce another sound (-wave). Rather, like motions (in your Nyaya- 
Vaisesika system) it produces a trace which produces a subsequent 
motion which in turn produces another trace, etc. But there is no 
substance sound (or aka§a) in all this. 

Objection: A sound-wave destroys its predecessor. 

Answer: Why so? A sound is produced by something striking 
something. The subsequent sound is not thus produced. Is it a 
reflection, like the color mirrored in the water, say? If so, the 
Vaisesikasttra will be undermined. Also, you hold that sound can be 
produced from disjunction, but that is not right, for no sound issues 
when one removes his hand from the wall (say). 

51.(E138-141; T110-113) Odor does not travel to the nose to get 
smelt, any more than sound goes to the ear to get heard. What 
happens is that the flower's smell scents a portion of the air, which 
then scents another portion until the series arrives at the nose. 
Likewise, the heat in air, or the cold there, are not carried by hot or 
cold particles of fire or water, but the air is tinged. If it were not so 
we would see fiery color or watery colors in the hot or cold air. And 
if neither explanation is accepted air will be without touch, which 
is contrary to experience. 

Objection: But in an airtight room a smell arises, so that it can't 
be passed through the air; it must be that there is a series of smells. 

Answer: We admit that in such a case that must be, but where 
there is air it is as we said. 





TATTVASIDDHI 271 


52.(E141; T113) The same kind of explanation is offered for 
touch, i.e., that it does not travel nor does its locus (a particle) do 
so, but a series of touches is passed through the air, e.g., from the 
sun. So, after the sun has set and we can't see its color we still feel 
its heat--thus some fire has color and some not. 

53.(E141-143; T113-115) You said that the internal organ 
travels, but that is wrong. It arises and is destroyed at each moment, 
so cannot move. Various unwanted results accrue from the notion 
that the internal organ travels--e.g., that doubt will not be possible; 
if the internal organ goes to another world when it recollects a 
former life there the body will die. 

Objection: In dreams the internal organ travels to other places. 

Answer: Not so; people talk like that, but in fact the activities in 
dreams are false, though some activities (like wet dreams) take 
place in the body then. 

54.(E143-148; T115-119) The sense-organs are formed of the 
great elements, but they are not limited spatially to the places in the 
body which support them (viz., the eye-socket, the nasal passages, 
the auditory cavity, etc.). Those (Samkhyas) who say that they are 
produced from ego and are thus without form are wrong, since they 
are material and impinge on their objects, as we have seen. But it 
is evident that they are not limited by their loci in or on the body, 
as we can see that the visual organ can grasp big and small things 
at the same time, have different tactile sensations at once, etc. So 
the organ is not confined to the body; if it were, we would have two 
visual organs, two olfactory organs (one for each eye and for each 
nostril), etc. (The Nyaya-Vaisesika account in terms of a ray for 
vision is taken up again and refuted.) 

Objection: The sense-organs are limited. They each grasp certain 
kinds of objects, not others, and they only contact the limited 
natures of the appropriate kinds of objects. 

Answer: Although all matter is derived from the great elements, 
only some of it makes up the sense-organs. Likewise only some of 
it is limited; the rest is not. And we have already discussed the 
question of sense-object contact. , 

55.(E148-149; T119) It is blue, yellow, etc., which are termed 
bases of color. ‘ 

Objection: The siitra says that karma and size are also bases of 
color. 


272 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer: Configurations are varieties of colors. 

Objection: But we cognize colors first, then configurations. 

Answer: The cognition of short, long, etc. (i.e., of shape and size) 
arises in mental awareness supported by the experience of colors, 
not in the sense-organ. And karma is past (and so not part of the 
senses). 

Objection: You hold that the past doesn't exist. So, since karma 
is past, it doesn't exist, and thus there is no merit or demerit, and 
no karmic result. 

Answer: Merit and demerit are achieved when something arises 
in a different place and time from its karmic occasion. 

56.(E149-151; T120-121) Sounds, which do not produce great 
elements, are unlike color and the other qualities that do so in 
several ways. A sound does not reproduce its kind over and over in 
its locus as color does. And it isn't produced in the same way as a 
color is. Colors grow along with the growth of the colored things, 
but sounds don't. Nobody speaks of the sound on the drum as one 
does of the color on the table. 

Objection: When things strike each other they sound. 

Answer: Not always. Anyway, the relationship is different. It is 
a matter of perception that sounds arise from the great elements, as 
well as in accord with usage--we say "the sound of the bell" or "of 
the drum", etc., where the kind of sound is identified through the 
matter causing it (unlike color, whose kinds may occur in any 
locus). Aka@ga is not the cause of sound, since it is not regularly 
accompanied by a sound. 

57.(E149-153; T121-123) The characteristics of smell. 

58.(E153; T123) The characteristics of taste. 

59.(E153-155; T123-125) The kinds of touch are listed. The 
VaiSesika position that there are only three kinds--hot, cold and 
neither--is criticized. They say that water has only cold touch, but 
surely a watery gruel in order to have the beneficial results that 
medical doctor ascribes to it must be hot. 


CHAPTER TWO: Awareness 


60.(E156-157; T125-126)*** There is only awareness (citta); 


TATTVASIDDHI 273 


there are no mental associates (caitasika). It is the same thing that 
is called variously "awareness", "mind", "consciousness". Likewise, 
feelings, identifications and traces are particular bits of awareness. 

Objection:**> So why aren't feelings, identifications and traces 
called "awarenesses", since they too have contents. 

Answer: Lots of things have more than one name. 

61.(E157-159; T126-128) Objection: Since there is connection 
between them there must be both awareness and mental associates. 
An awareness cannot be associated with another awareness. 
Furthermore, awareness falls under seven elements, one sense and 
one aggregate, while mental associates come under one element, 
one sense and three aggregates. Awareness is the locus; the 
associates are located there. A siitra says that there will be no 
aggregates if there are no mental associates. And they arise from 
different factors--awareness from two (sense-organ and object), 
mental associates from three (those two plus awareness). The 
Buddha says that mental associates are born from and are supported 
by awareness, not that there is only awareness. Furthermore, if only 
one of the two exist, why shouldn't it be the mental associates? 

62.(E159-160; T128-129) Objection continued: Furthermore, 
there must be mental associates, since awareness and the associates 
have different marks. Consciousness is what cognizes, feeling 
experiences satisfaction and frustration, identification grasps things 
as blue, yellow, etc., and traces condition the cognitions of things. 
The things cognized, felt, identified and made are different from 
consciousness, feeling, identification and trace. Also, you say that 
awareness is what is liberated. But in fact the siitra says that 
wisdom is liberated because of separation from ignorance, but that 
mere awareness is not liberated. The Buddha also says that what 
is "internal" is the body of consciousness, i.e., consciousness together 
with the sense-organs, and what is "external" is the content of that 
consciousness. Later in the same siitra the external is precisely the 
mental associates. 

63.(E160-161; T129-131) Answer: There are no such separate 
things as mental associates. And the Buddha didn't classify 
awareness under elements, senses, etc.--that is the work of the 
compilers of the sutras. As for the argument about awareness being 
the locus and the associates the located, you believe that mental 
consciousness is located in awareness but you don't call it a mental 


274 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


associate, so in fairness you shouldn't make this argument here. 
The aggregates, in my view, are several distinct kinds of awareness, 
just as for you they are several distinct kinds of mental associates. 
Since awareness and its purported associates come into existence 
simultaneously there is no reason to attribute the one to two factors, 
the other to three. And you argue that the Buddha didn't deny 
mental associates, nor do I do so--rather, I view them as kinds of 
awareness. In fact, the necessity for admitting mental associates 
other than awareness only arises if those associates are thought of 
as objects, and that argument is unacceptable here. It is just 
awareness that arises from awareness. 

64.(E163-167; T131-132) You further argued (in 62 above) that 
the mental associates have different distinguishing marks from 
awareness. But that is incorrect. It is just awareness which is 
grasped as feelings, identifications and traces as well as cognitions. 
The siitra on which you base your next argument--that mere 
awareness is not liberated--is improperly understood. In fact the 
sutra says that awareness gets liberated from the threefold 
contaminants. 

65.(E163-167; T132-136)**° No simultaneity is possible between 
a cause and its effect, so feeling, etc., cannot be associated 
simultaneously with awareness. The supporting object cannot arise 
at the same time as the awareness, for then there would be two 
awarenesses at the same time, which is impossible. The 
development of the several kinds of awareness is gradual, not 
simultaneous, since the siitra clearly implies that one can be aware 
without identification or feeling, etc. Again, initial thought is absent 
from the five kinds of sensory awareness, since you admit that 
sensation is devoid of conceptual construction inasmuch as there is 
no desire to communicate to another at that point. And it is 
likewise evident that initial and sustained thought do not occur 
simultaneously. 

Again, how can memory and the joy of having remembered, or 
desire and lack of desire, or knowledge and ignorance, doubt and 
decision, belief and disbelief occur in the same (act of) awareness? 
If you say that satisfaction and frustration reside in different 
awarenesses, then knowledge and ignorance should also be 
attributed to different awarenesses. The Buddha explains the 
successiveness of awarenesses corresponding to the different "mental 


TATTVASIDDHI 275 


associates" in the Bodhyangasiitra and Astangamargasitra as well as 
the Anukramasitra, the Nidanasiitra and the Srotapannasiitra. 

66.(E167-168; 1T137-138) Objection: There is association. 
Awareness resides in the self, as do the other aggregates. If 
awareness and the mental associates develop gradually a person will 
depend on two aggregates, not five, since you say the five 
aggregates do not exist in the present. Furthermore, association is 
spoken of in the siitras (passages quoted). And the Abhidharmika 
says: The elements of enlightenment are not dissociated from one 
who is yoked in spiritual practice. So, they must be associated. 

67.(E168-171; T138-141) Answer: The self doctrine is a wrong 
view. As for what we say about the aggregates: what we say is that 
four factors gradually appear in the contentfilled acts of 
understanding of individuals: identification arises after 
consciousness, feeling after identification, volition after feeling, and 
joy or depression, etc., after volition. The siitras that speak of 
association are in some cases of questionable authenticity, in others 
are misinterpreted by you. (The passages are interpreted properly.) 
The passage about the elements of enlightenment is likewise 
misinterpreted by you; it does not mean that one should meditate 
on all the elements simultaneously, but that they should be 
meditated on on suitable occasions. 

68.(E171-173; T141-143)**” Vijfidna and citta are the same thing, 
viz., awareness, and there are many kinds of it. For awareness of 
color is different from awareness of smell, etc., and visual awareness 
depends on light while auditory awareness depends on other things. 
Right awareness is different from wrong awareness, good from bad 
awareness. So, awarenesses differ on account of their causal 
conditions, as well as on their purity or impurity and the feelings 
involved therein. 

69.(E173-174; T143-144) Objection: There is just one awareness. 
A single awareness operates through the five sense-organs. 
Furthermore, since a self is unacceptable, it is awareness that 
performs actions and reaps their results. It is awareness that dies, is 
born, gets bound and released, that remembers and accumulates 
traces. 

70.(E174-175; T144-145) Objection continued: It is wrong to say 
that awareness of color is different from awareness of smell, etc. 
Just as one person inside his house watches different events through 


276 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


different windows, so the one awareness experiences different data 
through different organs. Furthermore, wrong awareness becomes 
right awareness, bad becomes good, one does past and future acts 
and is thus pure or impure, etc. So there is only one awareness. 

71.(E175-176; T145-146) Answer: Awareness does not cognize 
itself. Memory is of previously experienced things, not of itself. This 
talk of awareness acting, experiencing, dying, getting born, etc., is 
conventional only. You mention the accumulation of traces--but if 
awareness were permanent it would need no traces. The postulation 
of traces is required to explain how one awareness affects another, 
and is not required if there is only one awareness. 

72.(E176-177; T146-148) You are wrong to say that one 
awareness can perform several cognitive acts. Just as the hand 
holds the pot and cannot hold another actual object, so the 
awareness that grasps color cannot also grasp sound, etc. Since 
both the visual organ and the visible object are momentary, visual 
awareness must also be momentary. And what is momentary does 
not move. In your example of a person in his house watching 
different events the person is treated in the conventional manner as 
a single individual, but in a scientific treatise such as this the true 
nature of things is being investigated, and so everything should be 
treated in terms of its true nature. A person is five aggregates, not 
a single individual. The argument about karma and fruition has 
been replied to elsewhere. 

73.(E178; T148-149)*°* Objection: If awareness is momentary it 
cannot give rise to a thought of color, etc. Even though a flash of 
lightning remains for a short time it doesn't provide identification-- 
how much less a momentary awareness! You say that it is the 
stream of consciousness that reflectively discerns, but that is not 
right. For if a single awareness does not discern, a stream of them 
cannot do so. It is not like the strength in a cloth made of threads 
lacking that strength, for a single awareness has no capacity to 
arouse thought, and so a whole stream of them doesn't either. 

74.(E179-180; T149-151) Answer: Awareness produces thought 
through the force of the signs formed in awareness, not because it 
remains for a short time. If it were not so we would not experience 
momentary sounds arousing thoughts. The awareness that arouses 
the thought of blue does not arouse the thought of yellow, so even 
if awareness were to last for a time it wouldn't help to explain the 


TATTVASIDDHI 277 


production of thoughts. Again, there are two kinds of grasping, 
discerning and nondiscerning. If awareness were not momentary it 
would discern every graspable thing in its entirety. In our view, 
however, the grasping of a stream of several awarenesses is what 
discerns an object, while a practically momentary awareness or set 
of awarenesses is nondiscerning. 

Awarenesses, minds and consciousnesses are momentary, because 
when an aggregate of blue, say, is presented in front of one, 
consciousness is immediately produced. A person may think he is 
experiencing all objects at a single time; if awareness continued for 
a time he could not have had that erroneous thought. Again, if one 
believes that awareness is not momentary he must admit that the 
same awareness is both true and false, and that a doubting 
awareness is the same as a belief. 

75.(E180-181; T151)**° Objection: Some Abhidharmikas say that 
awarenesses can occur simultaneously, since a person can grasp 
various sense-contents at the same time--can see a pot, hear music, 
smell fragrance, taste food, and feel a breeze all at the same time. 
Now if it is one consciousness that grasps all these things this will 
conflict with the Buddha's denial of wholes distinct from collections 
of parts; so we conclude that this experience (of grasping various 
sense-contents at once) requires simultaneous awarenesses for its 
explanation. 

76.(E181-182; T151-153) Answer: Your explanation fails to note 
that awareness depends on attention. Visual, etc. awareness depends 
on attention to visual contents, etc. Things come to be depending on 
their karmic causes, and since awarenesses arise one by one no 
maturation is experienced simultaneously either on earth or in hell. 
Awareness grasps its object very quickly; sometime, as in the circle 
of fire, the intervals between awarenesses are not noticed. If 
awarenesses were simultaneous, everything could be produced at 
once, and a man could be liberated without effort. That 
awarenesses occur gradually is attested by experience. 

Question: Because of what are the awarenesses necessarily 
gradual in occurrence? 

Answer: Because of their directly antecedent conditions. Just as 
for you one self has one internal organ, so for us one awareness has 
one directly antecedent condition, just as the sprout springs up 
following the seed and not otherwise. 


278 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


CHAPTER THREE: Identification 


77.(E183-186; T153-157) Identification is the grasping of the 
signs of empirical factors. It involves perverted views, such as that 
the noneternal is eternal, frustration is satisfying, what is without 
self is with self, etc. There are three kinds of identifications-- 
pleasing, hateful and neutral, and three kinds of feelings that arise 
from them productive of three kinds of poison. So the Buddha says 
that identifications should be abandoned. 

Objection: This cannot be right, since one rejects the defilements 
through identification following the sitras which speak of 
identification as eradicating greed, ignorance, etc. 

Answer: In those passages "identification" refers to wisdom. 
(Other passages are cited to support this.) 

Identifications grasp signs, it was said. What are "signs"? Some 
say that they are five--past, future, convention, contact and person, 
but that is wrong since a person is based in the five aggregates. 
Rather, these "signs" are the supporting objects corresponding to the 
empirical factors that signify the presence of those factors, and 
which are different from those factors themselves. 

Objection: The signs cannot be supporting objects, for there is a 
type of concentration which has as its supporting object a state 
called "signless". 

Answer: There are two kinds of signs, blameworthy and not 
blameworthy. In order to preclude the first kind the adept is advised 
to experience directly without registering the signs of empirical 
things, but it is not a defect to experience blameless supporting 


objects through their signs, objects such as liberation, concentration 
and the like. 


CHAPTER FOUR: Feelings 


78.(E186-188; T157-158) There are three kinds of feelings: 
satisfying, frustrating, and neither. The satisfying kind occurs when 
body and mind are expanded, the frustrating kind when they are 
contracted. The third kind is contrary to both the other two. 

Feelings are either one or another of these three kinds, but the 
objects of feelings are not, since under different circumstances a 


TATTVASIDDHI 279 


thing may occasion one or another kind of feeling. When 
frustration is caused to stop a satisfying feeling arises. There the 
satisfying feeling is conventional, not absolutely real. 

Objection: That cannot be right, for satisfaction is the result of 
meritorious behavior and frustration the result of demeritorious 
behavior. Furthermore the material and immaterial realms must be 
the abodes of satisfaction, not to speak of the presence of 
satisfactions in the realm of desire. 

Answer: If anything were really satisfying that would contradict 
the (Buddhist) tenet that all is frustrating. Satisfaction is only a 
lessening of frustration. 

79.(E188-189; T158-161) Extended arguments are reviewed 
showing that only frustration is real, not satisfaction. Furthermore, 
the body is the source of all frustrations. Thus the functioning of the 
body is frustrating. 

80.(E190-192; T161-163) Since the feeling of satisfaction is the 
root cause of karmic activities the wise man abandons that feeling. 

81.(E192-196; T163-168) Objection: There is no such thing as 
(the third alleged kind of feeling, viz.,) a feeling that is neither 
satisfying nor frustrating. No such thing is ever felt. 

Answer: Surely there is such a feeling; it arises from objects to 
which one is indifferent. There are eight worldly factors: lust, 
nonlust, blame, praise, fame, ill-fame, satisfaction and frustration. 
Four are favorable, four are unfavorable to ordinary persons. But 
the noble ones, who are free from desire, are indifferent to such 
things. And that indifference is itself a feeling. 

All accompaniments of mind are feelings. And all conditioning 
factors are frustrating, since they cause frustration. 

Question: How about pure feelings? 

Answer: Even they are productive of frustration, since they 
involve the view of self. But pure feelings are superior to impure 
ones since they are propadeutic to liberation, involving the 
realization that all is frustration. If a pure feeling were satisfying the 
wise man would not direct his mind on nirvana. 

Question: In each feeling three residues of the afflictions arise. 
But how can attraction arise as a residue in a satisfying feeling? 

Answer: No attraction arises as residue in a frustrating feeling. 
Delusion is a residue in every feeling. It is because of delusion that 
frustration is misidentified as satisfying. When an entity is not 


280 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


properly identified and taken to be frustrating, aversion arises. And 
in the third kind of feeling (neither frustrating nor satisfying) only 
delusion, and not attraction nor aversion, are experienced. Because 
of this people call the supporting object of such a feeling superior, 
but the Buddha tells us that the object is not superior, for an object 
is merely an occasion which may trigger any kind of feeling. In fact, 
satisfaction and frustration are present in the third kind of feeling 
but are not noticed since their respective objects are not 
experienced. 

There follows an extended discussion of the proper interpretation 
of scriptural passages bearing on this question. 

82.(E196-199; T168-170) Question: Who feels--the person or the 
feeling? 

Answer: The person. Though the siftra says it is the feeling that 
feels, what is meant is the awarenesses which experience the 
feelings, being qualified by those feelings as signs. 

The Buddha speaks of bodily as well as mental feelings in order 
to quiet the Tirthikas who locate feelings in a self. The "bodily" 
feelings are those arising from the external sense-organs. Such 
feelings are only satisfying or frustrating, not indifferent. 

Question: Which of the three kinds of feelings produces the 
heaviest afflictions? 

Answer: One can find among Abhidharmikas those who contend 
for each of the three (satisfying, frustrating, neither) involving the 
heaviest afflictions. Some of their arguments are reviewed. 

83.(E199-203; T171-173) This section explores which feelings are 
experienced in the higher meditative stages. 


CHAPTER FIVE: Conditioning Factors 


84.(E203-206; 1174-176) Synonyms for cetan4 ("volition") are 
prarthana and pranidhdna. Conditioning factors are things which 
make things. Prarthana is that which has a thirst for making 
aggregates. 

Objection: Prarthana is then thirst, not volition. 

Answer: No, since volition is the result of thirst, not its cause. 
Furthermore, volition is the same thing as the mind. Otherwise 
there would be no mental action. 





TATTVASIDDHI 281 


85.(E206-208; T176-178) Contact (sparga) is consciousness 
relating to a supporting object. The commonly proclaimed definition 
of contact, that it is the meeting of three (elements), is not the 
correct definition, for no sense-organ reaches to the supporting 
object. 

Objection: Contact is a distinct accompanying factor. A sitra 
speaks of a twofold contact--one the contact between three 
elements, and second the result of such contact. 

Answer: This view, though regularly cited, runs counter to the 
factor's definition. If contact were a distinct accompanying factor it 
would differ from other such factors, since it is itself the condition 
of accompanying factors. It cannot be its own condition. 

Objection: A particular contact conditions the accompanying 
factors which cause (other) contacts, just as thirst conditions feeling 
but that feeling does not condition that thirst. 

Answer: In the first moment there is thirst, in the next, feeling; 
there is nothing found in between, and so no cause to postulate any 
contact. 

86.(E208-210; T178-180) Each act of attention (manaskdra) 
determines a distinct awareness. Attention is of two kinds: right 
and wrong. Right attention is that involving correct reasoning and 
directed toward the nature of things; it is also generated at an 
appropriate time and place. The reverse of this is wrong attention. 

87.(E210-211; T180-181) Interest is covetousness. 

88.(E211-212; T181-182) Joy is delight 

89.(E212-213; T182-183) Faith is concentration on a content. It 
is the purity of mind gotten from listening to others speaking of 
dharma. Since those who speak of dharma may not themselves 
have faith, or be good teachers, one can divide faith into delusive 
and nondelusive, or into three--good, bad and neutral--on the 
grounds of distinctions among those toward whom the faith is 
directed. 

90.(E213; 1183) Energy is venturing (abhyutsdha). It 
accompanies attention and concentration. It has three kinds: good, 
bad and neutral. Good energy is what is included in the four right 
efforts. Good effort is also known as good belief, and assists 
attention and concentration gaining everything. 

91.(E213-214; T183-185) Memory is awareness of what was 
previously experienced. 


282 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Objection: Since awareness is momentary, how can what is 
experienced by one awareness be remembered by another? 

Answer: That's how memory works. For example, what was 
grasped by a visual awareness is subsequently grasped by a mental 
awareness. Likewise, a noble person can cognize what was 
experienced in another body in some previous life through memory. 

92.(E215-216; T185-186) Initial, and sustained thought are 
respectively gross and subtle stages of unconcentrated awareness. 

93.(E216-217; T186-187) Heedlessness is wrongly performing or 
failing to perform meritorious acts. Neither it nor its opposite, 
heedfulness, is a separate factor. 

Tranquillity is when while the mind is working the body and 
mind become free from depravity. 

94.(E218-221; T187-190) The dissociated mental factors are said 
to be possession, nonpossession, nonconceptual identification, 
cessation-trance, life-faculty, birth, disappearance, duration, change, 
old age, death, collection of words, collection of terms, collection of 
syllables, ordinariness, etc. 

Possession is only the coming together of factors in an existent 
being. One who has all five aggregates is termed "(having) 
possessed (prapta) karma’, i.e., one who experiences the results of 
previous good and bad acts. But neither possession nor the lack of 
it nor nonpossession are separate factors dissociated from 
awareness. 

Nor is there a factor called “nonconceptual identification" for 
there is no stage where all awarenesses and associated factors 
disappear for ordinary people They still operate, but very subtly, so 
the state is called "nonidentifying". Likewise, cessation-trance is not 
a separate factor, any more than nirvana is. The life-faculty is the 
stream of the five aggregates born of karma. Birth is the arising of 
the aggregates. Disappearance is their cessation from the present 
moment. Duration is their continuity in a modified form through 
change. None of these are separate factors. Phonemes, words and 
Sentences are not separate factors, but are to be brought under the 
sense-organs. 

Some say there is a distinct factor called ordinariness 
(prthagjanatva) distinct from the ordinary man, but this is a 
heretical view and would let in all sorts of abstract entities of the 
Sort VaiSesikas speak of. Abhidharmikas have studied the books of 





TATTVASIDDHI 283 


these heretics and have as a result composed works such as the 
Abhidharmasitras in which entities such as ordinariness are 
postulated. Other Abhidharmikas say there are factors like suchness 
(tathata), the highest point (bhiitakoti), and dependent origination. 
So analysis is required, not merely quoting the Buddha. 


BOOK THREE: Origin 
CHAPTER ONE: Karma 


95.(E222-223; T191-192) The second truth, the truth of origin, 
consists of karma and defilements. There are three kinds of karma: 
bodily, vocal and mental. Mental karma is of two kinds: mind and 
what arises from mind. The mental act is mind, consisting of a belief 
such as "I shall kill this being"; this act qua accumulated demerit 
exceeds bodily and vocal karma. When there is no belief the mind 
is different from karma. From manifest karma there arises 
unmanifest karma. It pertains to mind as well as body and speech. 

96.(E223-225; T192-194) Unmanifest karma is the merit and 
demerit that arise dependent on awarenesses and which continues 
to operate even in deep sleep or faint, etc. 

Some say that we perceive manifest karma, and since we do not 
perceive unmanifest karma it doesn't exist. But if it didn't exist then 
the merit accruing from, e.g., abstention from killing wouldn't exist. 

Objection: Abstention is negative, thus not an entity. The results-- 
e.g., of going to heaven--which are said to accrue from abstention 
from killing, actually arise from good awareness. 

Answer: No, for then the increase in morality couldn't be 
explained. For that matter manifest karma is not merely the act of 
killing, but rather a factor arising immediately following killing, 
immediately after which one gets the demerit of killing. E.g., if 
someone orders another person to kill someone, the first one (who 
gave the order) gets demerit immediately upon the act. This proves 
there is unmanifest karma. Mind and moral restraint are not the 
same thing, for one may have a bad or indeterminate mind, or even 
be without awareness, and still be said to be moral--or, for that 
matter, immoral. 

Question: Is unmanifest karma material or a dissociated factor? 


284 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer: Since it is a "manufacturer" (abhisamskara) and not a 
"modifier" (ripaka) it is brought under conditioning factors and not 
under matter. 

Question: But it is not one of the six “bodies of volition" 
(cetanakdya) which are said in the siitra to comprise the 
conditioning aggregates. Nor is it mentioned as a dissociated factor. 

Answer: We have previously said that there are merit and demerit 
apart from awareness. 

Question: What is wrong with saying unmanifest karma is 
material? 

Answer: Color, sound, smell, taste and touch are not in 
themselves meritorious or demeritorious; so unmanifest karma is not 
material. 

Unmanifest karma arises from good and bad actions, not from 
indeterminate ones. It arises at the moment of the second 
awareness. And it lasts for a longer or shorter time depending on its 
strength. 

97.(E226-228; T194-197) An act that is preceded by awareness 
is done with a cause; the opposite is what is not done with a cause. 

Question: Isn't this something "not done with a cause" an act? 

Answer: It is an act. However, an act done with a cause has 
maturation. It is done with conviction. The act "not done with a 
cause" is one done without conviction. Talk (about killing) by 
soldiers is without a cause; such talk by others is with a cause. 
When, e.g., one kills small creatures by walking on them, the act is 
without a cause. Such acts do not produce maturations. 

There are four classes of acts: (1) done but without preparation, 
e.g., when one repents of an act, or forgets to carry it out after 
planning it; (2) not done but with preparation, e.g., one who incites 
another to kill or to give a donation comes to be of pleasant 
disposition but earns demerit or merit for later; (3) done with 
preparation, e.g., one himself killing or donating comes to be of 
pleasant disposition but earns demerit or merit for later; (4) not 
done and without accumulating karma. 

Objection: Since the maturations will go on indefinitely there can 
be no liberation. 

Answer: A knower of the truth, though he performs acts with a 
cause, does not accumulate (merit or demerit). The seed that is 
burnt cannot germinate. 





TATTVASIDDHI 285 


Acts can be distinguished into those that have regular maturation 
and those that have irregular maturation. The former comprise not 
only the five producers of early retribution, but many other acts 
where the objects or the awarenesses involved are heavy. 

98.(E228-229; T197-198) Heavy evil is that whose results will be 
experienced in hell. They include acts that cause schisms in the 
order or splits in the dharma. Such acts are performed by those with 
extreme wrong views, with intense ill-will toward the Buddha. 
Piirana is mentioned as such a one. Generally, more serious evil is 
counted as heavy. 

99.(E229-231; T198-201) The greatest purpose is immediate 
enlightenment. A scale of actions slightly inferior to each other leads 
from the path to enlightenment for oneself, through the path of 
being a disciple, to that earning life in bhavagra for eighty thousand 
mahdakalpas (the highest purpose achievable in samsara), through 
that by which one obtains existence in the realm of nothingness for 
60,000 eons and the brahmaloka for half an eon, through that 
which gets one life among the paranirmita gods for 60,000 years, 
etc. 

Enlightenment consists in that type of factor called extreme 
emptiness. It is higher even than abandonment. Omniscience has 
as its purpose abandonment. Staying in the Bodhisattva state for a 
long time has for its purpose right abandonment, which is the same 
as shedding the fetters and the notion of self gradually through 
enlightenment. 

The stream-enterer, even though enjoying objects of desire, is 
said to be "the field of merit" because of his wisdom, but not the 
ordinary person who has abandoned passions and who is destined 
for bhavagra. The former has knowledge, the latter not so much. 
Maitreya is given due respect by perfected beings because of his 
awareness of enlightenment causing emptiness; likewise for any 
monk who awakens the highest awareness of enlightenment. This 
has been clearly expounded in the "Drstanta" (perhaps 
72.Kumaralata's?). 

100.(E231-242; T201-215) Acts are: good, bad or neutral. A 
good act is one done for another's welfare, i.e., causing satisfaction 
in others. What causes frustration in others is called bad. Medical 
treatments and operations, though causing temporary frustration, 
eventually produce satisfaction, so they are not bad actions. 


286 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Adultery, on the other hand, though producing temporary 
satisfaction, yields eventual frustration and so is bad. One who 
unknowingly provides poisonous food or drink with good intentions 
does a good act. 

Question: What about an act that serves others by killing living 
beings, for example? 

Answer: It causes both merit and demerit. 

Objection: But since the killing is done with good intentions, it 
should be good in accordance with the previous analysis. And we 
know that the good warrior goes to heaven. 

Answer: No. One necessarily earns demerit as a result of impure 
actions. The warrior, like the butcher, earns demerit by killing, 
though if he has a compassionate heart towards his victim he 
obtains merit thereby. (This discussion is quite extensive.) 

Objection: Your claim that good is an act done for another's 
welfare and bad what is intended to cause another's frustration is 
mistaken since, e.g., feeding oneself is meritorious, or sprinkling 
water on a shrine. Likewise, on your account one would accrue no 
demerit from violating the shrine, since no one is harmed, or from 
speaking ill of one who does not hear it. 

Answer: Feeding oneself is not in itself meritorious, but if done 
for the purpose of preparing the body to help others, it is. 
Sprinkling the shrine is symbolic to others and so does relate to 
others’ welfare. And speaking ill of someone to others develops 
frustration for the person slandered, and so is demeritorious. 

Satisfaction comes as maturation of good acts, frustration of bad 
acts. Neutral acts earn no maturation at all. 

101.(E242-243; T214-215) Bad conduct. 

102.(E244-245; T215-217) Good conduct. 

103.(E245-248; T217-221) There are three sorts of acts: (1) that 
act related to the realm of desire from the hells to the 
paranirmitavasavartin gods; (2) relating to the material realm, from 
the brahmaloka to the akanistha heaven; (3) relating to the 
immaterial realm, from the realm of nothingness to that of neither- 
identification-nor- nonidentification. Indeterminate action and acts 
with irregular maturations relate to realm of desire. All actions in 
the realm of desire have their maturations in that realm. 

Objection: If so this is the system of the heretics. All actions, 
whether meritorious or not, having maturation or not, are the 





TATTVASIDDHI 287 


results of previous actions. Then there will be no purpose in trying 
to gain merit, and no liberation is possible, for the maturations 
cannot be completely exhausted. 

Answer: This heretical view is not correct. It holds that 
satisfactions and frustrations, whether higher or lower, are all 
maturations of previous acts. Our view, however, is that the actual 
entities in the world are produced from causes and conditions 
operating at the present moment like the sprout and the seed. It is 
not correct to think that everything is conditioned by previous 
karma. 

Objection: If every maturation produces another one there will be 
an infinite regress. 

Answer: No. There are three kinds of maturations--good, bad and 
neutral. The first two produce maturations, but the third doesn't. 
There is purpose in trying to gain merit, for only by good actions 
now will the seeds of satisfying maturations in the future be sown. 
And liberation is possible, for karma is destroyed through attaining 
knowledge. 

Furthermore, every factor that arises has its root in some act, 
since it is regulated as arising from this person's body and from that 
one's. The regularity requires explanation through karma. 

Question: Why not hold that factors come from their material 
causes only? For example, black gram comes from black gram. 

Answer: Yes, that also has its root in action. Black gram comes 
from black gram on condition that some appropriate action arises. 
We infer this from the fact that in ancient times when people 
performed only good acts their rice supplies flowed spontaneously. 

Objection: Yes, right things are not born earlier. 

Answer: No, both right and wrong things are rooted in karma, 
being the maturations of general activity. E.g., the earth, etc. comes 
to be from obtaining the conditions for the activity of walking 
around; the moon and the sun come into being from obtaining the 
conditions of the activity of illuminating. So every entity that is born 
has action (karman) as its root. Even the pure conditioned things 
are rooted in karma. In this case the power of the knowledge 
conditioned by good conduct in previous births is responsible. 

104.(E248-251; T221-223) The Buddha says in a sittra that there 
are three kinds of maturations of karma--(1) in this life, (2) in the 
next birth, and (3) in some subsequent life. Maturations of actions 


288 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in the intermediate state immediately following this life will be 
experienced in the next life; those of other intermediate states will 
be experienced in future lives. 

Question: Are these actions of regulated maturation and at a 
regulated time? 

Answer: Some say that all three kinds of act have regulated 
maturations. But that is not right, since then the five producers of 
early retribution will not be of regulated maturation, but in the 
Satpadabhidharma it is said that they are. However, in the 
Lavanopamasitra they are said to be of unregulated maturation. In 
any case, all actions mature at a regulated time. An act need not 
mature, but if it does mature at all, it will do so at a specific one of 
the three times mentioned. 

Others say that a medical treatment is experienced in this world, 
as is good or bad action done relating to the Buddha, to noble 
persons or parents. Heavier actions which do not relate to these 
things, e.g., the five producers of early retribution, mature in the 
next life. Actions of Cakravartins and Bodhisattvas, being heavier 
still, mature in future births. , 

Others say that all three kinds of acts mature in accordance with 
one's vow. 

Someone in the womb, asleep, or insane, etc., cannot accumulate 
karma, since (s)he does not think. All who have the idea of self 
accumulate karma, even if they are free from passion. A noble 
person, who is free of the idea of self, does not accumulate karma. 

105.(E251-253; T223-226) In the realm of desire good acts 
produce satisfying maturations, bad acts frustrating maturations. 
Neutral acts may produce no feeling, or if they do they will be 
satisfying only. 

Some say that depression is not a maturation because it is a 
result of conceptual construction and so is very light and can be set 
aside. But this is wrong, since depression is worse than mere 
frustration; it produces more severe unhappiness. The ignorant are 
always in a state of depression, which is produced both from 
(previous) depression and from contentedness. E.g., when one loses 
someone one loves depression is born from joy, whereas when it is 
born from jealousy it is born from depression. Furthermore, that a 
maturation can be set aside is no argument, for a stream-enterer, for 
example, sets aside the maturations of hell, etc. (Aryadeva's 


TATTVASIDDHI 289 


48.Catuhsataka is quoted in this passage.) 

106.(E253-255; T226-229) The three obstructions are acting, 
defilement, and maturation. Actions, by producing maturations, 
obstruct the path to liberation. Defilements, by distracting one, 
obstruct liberation. And maturations of an intense sort likewise 
make it difficult or impossible for one to contemplate the path. 

107.(i:256-257; T229-231) There are four kinds of acts: (1) black 
with black maturation, an action because of which one is reborn in 
the avaivartika hell or as an animal or a ghost; (2) white with white 
maturation, an act through which one is born into one of the three 
realms as man or god; (3) black-white with black-white maturation, 
an act that is the mixture of the previous two; and (4) neither black 
nor white with neither black nor white maturation, a pure act that 
destroys the other three sorts of karma. 

108.(E259-259; T231-232) Five things are called "producers of 
early retribution" because _ their maturation is experienced 
immediately following this life. They are heavy because of the 
importance of the fields over which they range. They are (1) 
splitting the order, (2) causing bleeding in the body of a tathagata, 
(3) killing a noble person, (4) killing one's father or (5) killing one's 
mother. 

109.(E259; T233) Five more. 

110.(E259-265; T233-238) Acts may be classified as to which 
world they mature in--hell, animal, ghosts, humans, gods, and 
nonconcentration. The first has been explained in the 
Satpadabhidharme Lokaprajftapti. Killing brings rebirth in hell or 
for a very short span among animals, ghosts or humans, depending 
on the heaviness of the act. The animal rebirths involve specific 
retributions--e.g., intense hatred brings rebirth as a snake or 
scorpion, intense delusion as a pig, intense brutality as a lion or 
tiger, etc. Jealousy and greed bring rebirth respectively as ghosts 
with jealous or miserly dispositions. Similarly with other rebirths. 

111.(E266-267; T238-239) The seven kinds of bad behavior are 
killing, stealing, adultery, slander, harsh words, lying, and speaking 
senselessly. 

112.(E267-269; T239-242) The seven kinds of good behavior are 
the oppposite of the foregoing seven. There are three classes of 
these: moral behavior, meditation and concentration. Pure behavior 
is included in the second and third of these. 


290 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


113.(E270-271; T243-244) Eight-limbed fasting. 

114.(E271; T244-245) There are four impure positions: (1) 
someone who sees and denies that he does; (2) someone who does 
not see and affirms that he does; (3) someone who does not see 
affirming it but then denying it later (e.g., in court), (4) someone 
who sees denying it but later affirming it. There are four pure 
positions, the reverse of the above. 

Question: What is the difference between drsti, sruti, buddhi and 
jniana? 

Answer: The first three are varieties of belief. Drsti is belief in 
arising things. Sruti is belief in what an adept says. Jfiana is 
inferential awareness. Buddhi is the wisdom by which one 
discriminates the foregoing three. 

115.(E271-273; T245-247) In the realm of desire there is 
manifest karma, unmanifest karma, and what is neither manifest nor 
unmanifest. Likewise in the material realm. In the immaterial realm 
there is manifest, unmanifest, and pure karma. 

Manifest karma is what is done by body or speech. The 
accumulation of merit and demerit arising in dependence on 
manifest karma is unmanifest karma, the factors dissociated from 
awareness. There is also unmanifest karma that is born of awareness 
alone. What is neither manifest nor unmanifest is mind itself, the 
volition that is called action. How much unmanifest karma is 
obtained depends on how much mental effort is made. E.g., making 
a vow necessarily obtains unmanifest karma. 

Some say that in the brahmaloka there can be no manifest action 
productive of unmanifest karma because there are neither initial nor 
sustained thought there and those two are what produce karma. 
This opinion is wrong; there are both initial and sustained thought 
in the brahmaloka. 

116.(E273-279; T247-254) There are seven bad restraints plus 
the three intense kinds of mental acts, viz., passion, hatred and 
delusion. 

117.(E279; T254) Ten good action-paths. 

118.(E279-280; T255-256) The outcomes of bad actions are 
delineated. 

119.(E281-285; T256-261) Question: Which are most essential 
(lit., heavier)--bodily, vocal or mental acts? Some say that the first 
two are essential, since the producers of early retribution fall into 


TATTVASIDDHI 291 


those classes. Furthermore, one cannot kill a person through mere 
volition. Indeed, mere mental action has no maturation. One 
cannot get merit by merely wishing to be charitable; he's got to give 
ee "You are wrong. Mental action is more essential than the 
others, for without it the others do not exist. The maturation of 
mental acts can result in a life of 80,000 mahakalpas. Again, a 
person of good conduct who at the end of his life adopts a wrong 
view goes to hell. The reason why the producers of early retribution 
are essential is because the volition there is heavier. Actions of the 
relevant sorts--e.g., patricide--are not sinful if the mind is not aware 
of what is being done. And one certainly can gain merit by taking 
a vow, for example. 

120.(E285-287; T261-264) Various opinions are held about the 
body--that it is formed from prakrti, from God, from mahapurusa, 
or naturally. Different things have different sorts of causes. Since 
these things--prakrti, God, etc.--are not of varying sorts, they cannot 
be the causes in question. In fact, bodies are made from karma, for 
actions are of varying sorts. So a body is the result of karma of a 
given kind, not God's work. 


CHAPTER TWO 


121.(E288-290; T264-266) A defilement is an activity of filthy 
awareness. Awareness is called fil: iy when it is led by attachment, 
hatred and/or delusion. The accumulations produced by a filthy 
mind are called proclivities, of which there are ninety-eight varieties. 
But the defilements themselves are ten, viz., (1) attachment, (2) 
hatred, (3) delusion, (4) doubt, (5) pride, and (6-10) the five wrong 
views. (1) Attachment, called devotion to satisfaction, is of three 
kinds--sexual desire, the desire to come to be, and the desire not to 
come to be, i.e., to cease. os 

Objection: Devotion to satisfaction is a feeling, not a desire. 

Answer: The desire is caused by the expectation of satisfaction. 

122.(E290-291; T266-268) Classifications of attachment into 
several kinds. 

123.(E291-293; T269-270) The causes of desire. ie 

124.(E293-297; T270-274) The frustrating outcome of desire is 
illustrated at length. 


292 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


125.(E297-298; T274-275) One checks and eventually abandons 
attachment by meditating on it as impure and on the impermanence 
of everything. 

126.(E298-301; T275-279) (2) Hatred is malice. Its varieties are 
illustrated. It is likewise eradicated by meditating on its impurity 
and on impermanence. 

127.(E302-307; T279-285) (3) Delusion or ignorance is adverting 
to conventional designations, e.g., speaking as if there were a self. 
It is not mere lack of knowledge, but false, perverse awareness. It 
is the cause of all the conditioning factors. The noble one, having 
destroyed ignorance, has no such factors. All the other defilements 
are limbs of ignorance, since they all involve bad conduct which 
depends on wrong notions. 

Ignorance arises from thinking about what one has heard that is 
not properly conveyed. This occurs whenever one or another of bad 
causal factors, viz., bad friends, hearing wrong dharma, attending 
to the wrong things, or wrong activities, etc. 

One abandons ignorance by cultivating knowledge. 

Question: Knowledge is correct awareness about aggregates, 
elements and senses. So why does a siitra say that dependent 
origination and the meditation on it are the cure for ignorance? 

Answer: To avoid being taken in by the opinions of heretics. E.g., 
heretics say that God is the cause of the world, that there is 
substance, that there is a whole, etc. By meditating on dependent 
origination one avoids these views. Knowledge of aggregates, 
elements and senses is included within such meditation. 

128.(E307-310; T285-288) Elevating oneself through a false 
notion is (5S) pride. It is the elevation of a lower self. Any notion of 
relative worth with respect to others is a case of pride, even that of 
being equal among equals. It has many varieties, some of which are 
illustrated. It arises for those who do not understand the actual 
nature of the aggregates, who take material and other constituents 
for their self. Thus to remove pride one should meditate on 
impermanence, etc. 

129.(E320-321; T288-291) (4) Doubt is uncertainty about 
whether there is liberation or not, whether there are merit and 
demerit or not, whether there are three jewels or not. 

Question: What about empirical doubts about whether it is a tree 
Or a post, etc.? Are they to be classified under the category of 


TATTVASIDDHI 293 


defilements also? 

Answer: No. Those doubts are not defilements, for they do not 
occasion rebirth and can arise in persons free from contaminants. 
Doubt arises when cognizing two opposing features of a thing. It 
also arises from conditions such as excessive distance, etc., causing 
one not to comprehend the demarcating feature of a thing. So it is 
removed as soon as one does comprehend that feature. 

130.(E313-317; T291-297) (6) It is a wrong view to take there 
to be a self among the five aggregates. . 

Objection: What is the harm in calling the five aggregates a self, 
any more than there is in classifying pots, etc., according to their 
specific marks? 

Answer: One is misled thereby into thinking the aggregates are 
permanent and that the self is single. One is unable to comprehend 
the emptiness of things, and as a result defilements arise. The self- 
concept is a result of conceptual construction occasioned by listening 
to people speaking of "man", "god", etc. ty. 

Conceptions of the self are mentioned, including a Vedic view 
(quoted from the Purusastikta), the materialist view, the idealist 
view (that conceptual identification is the self), the view that 
conditions are the self or that consciousness is. 

Though it is a wrong view to hold that the self exists ultimately, 
it is also a wrong view to hold that the self does not exist relatively. 
To make the latter mistake is to fall into an extreme of nihilism, to 
make the former is to espouse eternalism. Both are wrong. 
Passages are quoted from works called Paramarthastinyatasiitra and 
Mahdastinyatastitra which say that the various things, such as the 
visual organ, old age and death, etc., though they do not exist 
ultimately, do exist relatively.**° 

131.(E318-320; T297-299) The view of (7) eternalism and the 
view of (8) nihilism are the extreme views. They are abandoned 
when one meditates on emptiness. 

132.(E320-325; T299-305) (9) To say that something exists when 
it doesn't, or (10) to deny that it exists when it does, is to express 
a false view. False views arise from delusion, through what is not 
a cause or what is only an apparent cause. Various false views are 
considered. 

133.(E326-327; T305-307) A perverse view is, e.g., asserting that 
what is false is true. Again, it is rating something or someone 


294 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


superior that (or who) is inferior. Perverse morals is indifference 
at enlightenment and attempting to become pure through mere 
ritual. 

134..(E327-328; T307-308) The afflictions are listed as 
sleepiness, excitedness, regret, mdyd, craftiness, shamelessness, 
disregard, heedlessness, cheating propaganda, insincere praise, 
praising one person in order to censure another, desire for gaining 
a gift by offering a small one, discontent, yawning, immoderation in 
eating, not making a sufficient effort, insufficient respect for one's 
leader, preferring evil to good. 

135.(E328-330; T308-310) The bad roots are lust, hate and 
delusion. 

Question: Do these roots reside in factors or in the beings 
affected by them? 

Answer: The idea of a living being arises from factors, and 
feelings arise in turn from the idea of a living being. From those 
feelings these three bad roots come forth. So these proclivities reside 
in living beings. Otherwise they would not cease when a given 
person loses them. 

136.(E330-339; T311-318) Three proclivities: desire, becoming, 
and ignorance. Four floods: desire, becoming, (wrong) views, 
ignorance. Four appropriatings: desire, (wrong) view, moral 
precepts and vows, and self-doctrine. Four knots: bodily 
covetousness, bodily malevolence, merely following rules concerning 
the body, attachment to the bodily status-quo. Five obstructions: 
sensual desire, malice, lethargy, excitedness, and perplexity. Five 
fetters relating to lower things: sensual desire, malice, attachment 
to mere rules, doubt, and self-view. Five fetters relating to higher 
things: excitedness, pride, ignorance, material desires, immaterial 
desires. Five kinds of selfishness: of abode, of family, of gain, of 
praise, of dharma. Five gaps (khila): doubting the teacher, doubting 
the Buddha, doubting the scripture, doubting the practice, doubting 
good people. These are "gaps" because one afflicted by them does 
not maintain goodness. Doubt of the Buddha comes from being 
unlearned, from being confused as a result of studying Veda and 
grammar, etc. Five (?) attachments: attachment to body, to sensual 
desires, failure to appreciate noble speech, pride in a small triumph. 
{It is not clear whether these are the five, or what is the fifth.) 

Proclivities are associated with awareness. 


TATTVASIDDHI 295 


Objection: They are dissociated from awareness, since children, 
who do not think on sensual desire, are nevertheless caught in the 
grip of sensory proclivities. 

Answer: No, there is no residue of sensual desire in children. If 
they are said to be subject to it it is only in the sense that they have 
not got the means to avoid it. 

Eight wrong paths explained. 

137.(E339-340; T319-320) Nine fetters. 

138.(E340-344; T320-324) Question: Are the ten generally 
permeating defilements--viz., lack of confidence, sloth, forgetfulness, 
distraction, ignorance, lack of comprehension, unreasoning 
attention, bad resolve, excitedness and heedlessness--associated with 
every defiled awareness? 

Answer: No; for example, excitedness is not present in every 
defiled awareness. 

Question: Some Abhidharmikas say that the self-doctrine is 
neutral, since if it were bad everyone who holds that doctrine would 
go to hell. 

Answer: It is not neutral; it is bad. One who asserts the self- 
doctrine to others goes to hell. 

Question: Suppose one mentions a false view and occasions doubt 
in someone's mind? 

Answer: That is not bad if he doesn't occasion a wrong view but 
merely occasions doubt. 

139.(E344-347; T324-328) An opinion regarding the systematic 
ordering of thoughts leading to the cessation of faults is rejected. 
The author thinks that the afflictions are gotten rid of through a 
variety of awarenesses. 

Question: Through which contemplations are the defilements 
destroyed? 

Answer: As supported by seven restorers, even including 
concentration in the realm of desire. 

The aspirant for liberation must understand that the defilements 
involve innumerable constructions; so the faults pertaining to the 
defilements must be consciously understood. 

140.(E347-353; T328-333) One whose thoughts are on nominal 
designations accumulates karma. A noble person does not do so. In 
fact, there is no pure action; it is the one who dwells on nominal 
designations that performs actions. All actions arise from the 


296 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


defilements. 

Question: Are living beings born defiled or undefiled? 

Answer: With defilements, since their birth is determined by 
previous karma born of defilements. 

Objection: Then a noble person shouldn't have a body, since the 
body is formed from the defilements and he doesn't have those. 

Answer: But his body is formed from previous defilements. 
However, the noble person does not suffer any more defilements, 
and so is eventually not reborn. 

Question: Isn't food a cause of the body as well as the 
defilements? 

Answer: Food produces matter, etc., through conscious 
designations, but the defilements are not produced through 
conscious designations. See 110 above. 

Question: If the body is caused by defilements then there can be 
no change in subsequent lives and so no possibility of liberation. 

Answer: Even though one is in a low life a good thought may 
arise, just as even when one is in a high life a bad thought may 
arise. Thus one's future maturations are changed. 


BOOK FOUR: The Truth of Cessation™! 
CHAPTER ONE 


141.(E354-357; T334-337)*2 The astra says that the cessation- 
truth is the cessation of three awarenesses, viz., the awarenesses of 
designations, of factors and of emptiness. The first of these is caused 
to cease by awareness based on much learning or through thought. 
The second is caused to cease by becoming aware of emptiness. And 
the last ceases on entering the cessation trance, or at the time the 
stream of factors is completely destroyed by entering liberation 
without residue. 

34 nominal designation is a conceptual construction of a person 
that arises in dependence on the five aggregates, or of a pot on the 
basis of color, taste, smell, etc. Such things (as person or pot) are 
mere names; the reality of factors is denied in the sutras. 

The Buddha says there are two truths, highest and conventional. 
The highest truths are matter, etc. and liberation. The conventional 
truth is what is mere designation, e.g., the pot or the person. 





TATTVASIDDHI 297 


The conventional truth is useful not only for daily life but also so 
that the Buddhist message and discipline can be conveyed. One 
controls the mind through conventional truth, then destroys it by 
the highest truth. A siitra says that nirvana is to be understood by 
investigating the factors. The yogi having understood previously 
which factors are nominal designations and which are realities 
comes eventually to directly realize the truth of cessation. It is a 
gradual progress: first the defilements cease in order from gross 
toward subtle. E.g., the notions of male and female are caused to 
cease by analyzing them into various sorts of hair, etc., and then 
those notions in turn are caused to cease through analysis into 
emptiness. The middle way is accomplished through worldly truth 
between extremes in this progression. The Buddha even affirms that 
from the worldly point of view it is right to say that the self exists 
and wrong to deny it. 

142. (E358-361; T337-341)*“4 Pots, etc., are nominal existents, 
not actual ones. The marks of nominal existence are: (1) that signs 
are available--e.g., color is a sign of the pot, but not of matter; 
feeling has no color; (2) where something operates in dependence 
on association with something else--e.g., a lamp illuminates in 
dependence on the colors of the things illuminated, and burns in 
dependence on the touch associated with it in the things; (3) what 
is nominal depends on another factor, e.g., the pot depends on 
color, but feeling doesn't; (4) nominal designations possess various 
factors, e.g., a lamp can both illuminate and burn, but a feeling only 
feels; (5) the term corresponding to a designation applies to a thing 
with constituents--e.g., "chariot"--but a term for an actual entity such 
as "matter" does not so apply; (6) color, etc., when spoken of by 
that term are obtained, but pot, etc., when spoken of as "pot", etc., 
are not obtained; (7) awareness of nominally designated things 
wanders, is not concentrated. E.g., one says he sees a horse, another 
that he sees the skin of a horse. Or there is difference of opinion as 
to whether a pot is visible or not, etc. There is no such indecision 
about actual entities. I can see color but I cannot see sounds. (8) 
Nominally designated is what is knowable and speakable, but what 
is knowable but inexpressible is highest truth. E.g., matter, etc., is 
expressible through its own mark, but pot, etc. is not expressible 
through its own mark. So the latter are nominal designations. (9) 
Nominally designated is what has no mark of its own, what is real 


298 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


does. (10) The marks of the nominal are not single. Whereas feeling 
is marked as that which feels, a person is marked by good, bad and 
neutral acts. (11) Nominally designated factors cause proclivities, 
while real ones do not. (12) Awareness arises not from nominally 
designated things but from actual ones, e.g., the matter that is in 
front of one. At the next moment there is constructed by mental 
awareness "I see the pot", etc. This talk of "pot" depends on color, 
etc. What is real is such that awareness of it doesn't depend on any 
other thing. (13) Doubts arise about nominally designated things-- 
e.g., whether one is a post or a man. But no doubt as to whether a 
color is a color or a sound can arise. Doubt can arise as to whether 
there is color or no color, e.g., when one is told that color is empty. 

Objection: Then the cessation-truth must itself be a nominal 
designation, since doubt as to whether it exists or not may arise. 

Answer: This happens to one who has not realized the cessation- 
truth, not when one has. 

(14) One can have awareness of a pot's color, touch, etc., but not 
of color's different qualities. (15) What is grasped by many senses 
is nominal; not so the real. (16) A nominal thing is without essential 
nature and yet capable of action. (17) All actions such as coming or 
going, destroying, burning, etc., are nominal, not real. (18) What is 
relative is nominal; the real is not dependent. E.g., heavy, light, 
long, short, etc., are nominal designations, but color, which does not 
depend on anything, isn't. (19) Pursuing the conduct of emptiness 
is nominal; pursuing the conduct of no-self is real. (20) There are 
four opinions which involve ignorance--identity, multiplicity, 
indescribability and negation. Therefore pots, etc., are nominal 
designations. The doctrine of identity is that the pot is just its color, 
taste, smell and touch. The doctrine of multiplicity is that the pot is 
different from those qualities. The doctrine of indescribability is that 
one cannot say that the pot is identical with or different from those 
qualities. And the doctrine of negation is that the pot doesn't exist. 
All four doctrines are wrong. 

143.(E361-363; T341-343) Each of the qualities color, taste, etc., 
are different and separate. If the pot were identical with one it 
could not be identical with the others. 

Objection: One seed does not constitute a bundle, but that which 
seeds comprise does; likewise each of color, taste, etc. are not a 
piece of earth, but what they comprise is. 





TATTVASIDDHI 299 


Answer: The example is inappropriate, since a bundle is only a 
nominal designation. We are criticizing the identity doctrine in its 
application to real factors. 

Question: When one speaks of the color of the pot, etc., it is not 
like speaking of the house of Silapurusa (where the house and 
Silapurusa have distinct marks), but like speaking of Silapurusa's 
hand and foot, which are not separate from Silapurusa. The pot 
cannot exist separate from its color, but what harm is there in 
speaking as if it had its own nature? 
_ Answer: This example too is not correct. For to speak of 
Silapurusa's hand is to indicate its distinction from his body. But 
there is no such distinction in reality, no Silapurusa exists to be 
identified or distinguished. : 

144.(E363-365; T343-345) If the piece of earth were different 
from its qualities we should have an awareness of it independently 
of those qualities. But we don't. We don't have sense-organs that 
grasp a piece of earth as a distinct factor. The five sense-organs each 
grasp their respective sense-contents. They do not grasp nominal 
things. The sixth organ does, of course, generate cognition of 
nominal things, for mental awareness has the capacity of ranging 
over everything. If, e.g., the visual organ could grasp both color and 
noncolored things all sorts of incongruities would arise. For 
example, if the visual organ could grasp what is not colored we 
should be able, e.g., to see sound. Again, if the post is visually 
perceptible just because its color is, then each organ should cognize 
its own substantial basis--not only the auditory organ should grasp 
akasa, but the visual organ should grasp its own fire, etc. But this 
is contrary to your own tenets. 

Objection: Only color occasions perception, not the other factors. 

Answer: But you have said previously that the perception of the 
pot is possible because it is constituted of several substances as well 
as through its color, which conflicts with what you now say. 
Furthermore, you hold that number and size, etc., can be visually 
perceived though they have no color. 

Objection: If color is not the cause of perception, number and 
size, etc., would be invisible as well as air. 

Answer: On our view only color is visibly perceptible; no other 
factors are. The visual organ sees when color is present, not 
otherwise. The idea of pot arises only when a color has been seen. 


300 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


So it is impossible that the notion of a pot arises in the absence of 
seeing a color. 

145.(E366; T345-346) Real factors are not inexpressible; they 
each have their respective nature. They are ordered and can be 
numbered, which they could not be if they were inexpressible. 

146.(E366-367; T146-147) If everything is nonexistent merit and 
demerit and liberation will be nonexistent too. Furthermore, even 
the existence of the notion that nothing exists won't exist, since 
there is no thinker to think it and no hearer to hear it. If nothing 
really exists everything should be the same--why do we judge them 
different from each other, since on this doctrine they can have no 
demarcating marks? 

147.(E367-369; T347-349) The nihilist says: Even though you 
criticize emptiness verbally, factors are really nonexistent, because 
they cannot be the contents of sense-organs. Pots cannot be seen; 
nor can their parts, which are conceived by abstraction from the 
whole pot. Even if they could be seen, since they would be 
analyzable indefinitely the process would culminate in emptiness. So 
parts are nonexistent from the point of view of reality. And for one 
who believes in parts the outcome would be that there cannot be 
two truths. Colors and other qualities are also nonexistent, since no 
visual organ can see subtle color, and the mind does not cognize 
present color. I.e., visual awareness does not conceptualize "this is 
color", and the mental awareness does not relate to present color. 
So there is nothing to conceptualize color, and so color is not 
cognizable. 

Objection: First, visual awareness grasps the color and then 
mental awareness remembers it. So the latter is the conceptualizer. 

Answer: How can it remember it since it never saw it? 

148.(E370; T349) Since sounds are momentary, there can be no 
language, as there is no single consciousness which can hear more 
than one syllable. Linguistic sounds do not exist. 

Some say that the auditory organ is ether in nature, and since 
ether is not a category the auditory organ doesn't exist either, and 
so language cannot be heard. 

149.(E370; T350) The same type of argument is applied to show 
the nonexistence of the other three sense-organs. 

150.(E371; T350-351) Mental awareness does not grasp factors, 
since it does not grasp colors, tastes, etc., occurring in the present, 


TATTVASIDDHI 301 


and what is past and future don't exist, as was already stated. 

Objection: Mental awareness cognizes itself. 

Answer: No factor can cognize itself, since no self-cognition is 
present at the present moment. 

Question: If one can know the awareness of another, then mental 
awareness must be able to cognize the mental states of that other. 

Answer: This is just a manner of speaking, as self-knowledge also 
is. 

151.(E371-373; T351-352) Nihilist: If the result exists, it is either 
already there in its cause or else it arises as a quality which was 
nonexistent earlier. But both views are faulty. The sound produced 
by clapping one's hands wasn't there before, nor were the curds in 
the milk before their production. On the other hand, experience 
shows that the result is determined by the character of its cause, 
which contradicts the second hypothesis. So, since neither of these 
two hypotheses is correct, there is no result. If the effect exists in 
the cause, the result that exists will not arise. But if the effect does 
not exist in the cause, it couldn't arise either, since it doesn't exist. 

Either the cause is before, after or simultaneous with its effect. 
But if it is before, since it has gone how can the effect appear? If it 
is after, it cannot produce an effect, not existing yet. And if it is 
simultaneous, neither one is cause or effect. Again, either the cause 
and its effect are different or the same. But if they are different the 
effect should be able to exist without its cause, and if they are the 
same, one cannot produce the other. 

If an effect exists it must be either self-made, made by another, 
made by both or unmade. But none of these are correct. Nothing 
makes itself. Nor is it made by another, since, e.g., in the 
production of awareness none of the causative elements--the visual 
organ, the color, etc.--has any idea of agency, nothing is made. The 
third possibility involves the defects in both the first two. And if it 
is unmade then it doesn't exist. 

152.(E373-374; T353-354) Reply to the nihilist: What you have 
been saying, viz., that all factors are empty, is not correct. If 
everything is nonexistent, this teaching is nonexistent also. And the 
Buddha himself says that some things are actual but unthinkable. 
Le., ordinary persons cannot understand them; only tathagatas can 
analyze the factors fully. Disciples and those self-enlightened have 


300 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


So it is impossible that the notion of a pot arises in the absence of 
seeing a color. 

145.(E366; T345-346) Real factors are not inexpressible; they 
each have their respective nature. They are ordered and can be 
numbered, which they could not be if they were inexpressible. 

146.(E366-367; T146-147) If everything is nonexistent merit and 
demerit and liberation will be nonexistent too. Furthermore, even 
the existence of the notion that nothing exists won't exist, since 
there is no thinker to think it and no hearer to hear it. If nothing 
really exists everything should be the same--why do we judge them 
different from each other, since on this doctrine they can have no 
demarcating marks? 

147.(E367-369; T347-349) The nihilist says: Even though you 
criticize emptiness verbally, factors are really nonexistent, because 
they cannot be the contents of sense-organs. Pots cannot be seen; 
nor can their parts, which are conceived by abstraction from the 
whole pot. Even if they could be seen, since they would be 
analyzable indefinitely the process would culminate in emptiness. So 
parts are nonexistent from the point of view of reality. And for one 
who believes in parts the outcome would be that there cannot be 
two truths. Colors and other qualities are also nonexistent, since no 
visual organ can see subtle color, and the mind does not cognize 
present color. I.e., visual awareness does not conceptualize "this is 
color", and the mental awareness does not relate to present color. 
So there is nothing to conceptualize color, and so color is not 
cognizable. 

Objection: First, visual awareness grasps the color and then 
mental awareness remembers it. So the latter is the conceptualizer. 

Answer: How can it remember it since it never saw it? 

148.(E370; T349) Since sounds are momentary, there can be no 
language, as there is no single consciousness which can hear more 
than one syllable. Linguistic sounds do not exist. 

Some say that the auditory organ is ether in nature, and since 
ether is not a category the auditory organ doesn't exist either, and 
so language cannot be heard. 

149.(E370; T350) The same type of argument is applied to show 
the nonexistence of the other three sense-organs. 

150.(E371; T350-351) Mental awareness does not grasp factors, 
since it does not grasp colors, tastes, etc., occurring in the present, 





TATTVASIDDHI 301 


and what is past and future don't exist, as was already stated. 

Objection: Mental awareness cognizes itself. 

Answer: No factor can cognize itself, since no self-cognition is 
present at the present moment. 

Question: If one can know the awareness of another, then mental 
awareness must be able to cognize the mental states of that other. 

Answer: This is just a manner of speaking, as self-knowledge also 
is. 

151.(E371-373; T351-352) Nihilist: If the result exists, it is either 
already there in its cause or else it arises as a quality «which was 
nonexistent earlier. But both views are faulty. The sound produced 
by clapping one's hands wasn't there before, nor were the curds in 
the milk before their production. On the other hand, experience 
shows that the result is determined by the character of its cause, 
which contradicts the second hypothesis. So, since neither of these 
two hypotheses is correct, there is no result. If the effect exists in 
the cause, the result that exists will not arise. But if the effect does 
not exist in the cause, it couldn't arise either, since it doesn't exist. 

Either the cause is before, after or simultaneous with its effect. 
But if it is before, since it has gone how can the effect appear? If it 
is after, it cannot produce an effect, not existing yet. And if it is 
simultaneous, neither one is cause or effect. Again, either the cause 
and its effect are different or the same. But if they are different the 
effect should be able to exist without its cause, and if they are the 
same, one cannot produce the other. 

If an effect exists it must be either self-made, made by another, 
made by both or unmade. But none of these are correct. Nothing 
makes itself. Nor is it made by another, since, e.g., in the 
production of awareness none of the causative elements--the visual 
organ, the color, etc.--has any idea of agency, nothing is made. The 
third Possibility involves the defects in both the first two. And if it 
is unmade then it doesn't exist. 

152.(E373-374; T353-354) Reply to the nihilist: What you have 
been saying, viz., that all factors are empty, is not correct. If 
everything is nonexistent, this teaching is nonexistent also. And the 
Buddha himself says that some things are actual but unthinkable. 
Le., ordinary persons cannot understand them; only tathagatas can 
analyze the factors fully. Disciples and those self-enlightened have 


302 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


understood the factors to the extent necessary for coming to know 
nirvana. But only Tathagatas are capable of understanding the 
original naturelessness of all things in all their particular and 
general aspects. Awareness of emptiness is easy, but analytical 
understanding of the factors is hard. 

Objection: What the Buddha teaches about the factors must be 
the way it is. 

Answer: The Buddha only teaches those aspects of things that are 
conducive to liberation. E.g., he has taught dependent origination 
in general but has not said precisely what is the cause of each and 
every thing. It doesn't follow that those things he doesn't speak of 
don't exist. One doesn't say that because the blind don't see colors, 
colors are nonexistent; likewise, one shouldn't say things don't exist 
because they are dependently originated. 

The omniscient Tathagatas declare the existence of the 
aggregates. Therefore, we must understand that all factors--color, 
etc.--exist just as the pot etc. do, viz. conventionally. 


CHAPTER TWO 


153.(E375-379; T354-359) It was said that the cessation-truth is 
the cessation of three awarenesses. The first has now been 
explained. As for the second, the cessation of awareness of factors, 
the awareness of factors is actually the awareness of the five 
aggregates. When the yogi meditates on the five aggregates as 
empty he gains cessation-awareness of factors. 

Objection: The yogi in meditating on them comes to see them as 
impermanent, noneternal, destructible, etc., ie., he comes to see 
them as empty. It is not that he does not see them at all. 

Answer: He does not see them at all. He abandons all awareness 
of conditioned things, and sees only unconditioned things. 

Spiritual practice is of two kinds, meditation on emptiness and 
meditation on selflessness. Meditation on emptiness is appreciating 
the nominal nature of the factors. But the meditation on selflessness 
is not seeing the factors at all. Through it one gets completely 
liberated. The cessation of all the five aggregates is selflessness. 

Question: If so, are there any aggregates at all? 

Answer: Not actually, but they exist conventionally. 


TATTVASIDDHI 303 


Question: If so, why was it said that color, etc., are real (cf. 
section 141)? 

Answer: For the good of living beings. Numerous passages are 
quoted to show that the ultimate message is that factors do not exist 
really though they do conventionally. 

The yogi should suppress all signs. If signs were really existent, 
he would remember them. This is not to endorse the view of the 
Tirthikas that at the time matter is suppressed it actually exists but 
is not recollected. Rather, the yogi necessarily sees the aggregates, 
oe because of the vision of cessation he enters into the signless 

state). 


CHAPTER THREE 


154.(E379-381; T359-360)*5 That which has nirvana as 
supporting object is called empty awareness. The awareness takes 
as supporting object the nonexistence of anything whatever. This 
awareness is finally suppressed in two states: (1) when one gains 
concentration without awareness, and (2) when one enters nirvana 
without any limitations left over. Then, the stream of factors being 
cut off through the destruction of karma, the awareness ceases. 


BOOK FIVE 
CHAPTER ONE: Concentration 


155. (E382-383; T361-362) The path is the noble eightfold path 
consisting of right view, etc., or in brief consisting of two--(1) 
concentration and (2) knowledge. 

Concentration is awareness' resting on one (thing) only by 
meditating on it many times. A sign of it is mental ease, pleasure 
and calm. It is the cause of knowledge of things as they are, which 
is knowledge of emptiness. 

156.(E383-385; T362-364) Question: Is concentration anything 
different from awareness? 

: Answer: No. Concentration is awareness that is fixed for a long 
time. It has two sorts: with contaminants and without 
contaminants. Concentration without contaminants is also called 
wisdom. Some Abhidharmikas call it the cause of liberation, but 


304 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


that is not a proper way of speaking, since concentration with 
contaminants may also contribute toward liberation. 

Again, one may divide concentration into three kinds: (1) limited, 
(2) wide, and (3) boundless, depending on the range of what is 
contemplated. It can also be divided into another three: (1) 
determination, (2) rising up (3) renunciation. 

There are three kinds of method for concentration: (1) the means 
of entering it, viz., through dharma, (2) the means of remaining in 
it, stability, and (3) the means of leaving it, through dharma. 

There are four conditions for gaining concentration: (1) present 
practice, (2) the condition of the front parts of the body, (3) 
understanding the marks of concentration, (4) following the dharma 
of concentration as taught. 

157.(E385-387; T364-367) Several sets of three are considered, 
drawn from siitra passages. Concentration may be (1) one-limbed, 
when one concentrates without wisdom, (2) two-limbed, when one 
practises with wisdom in the world, and (3) noble right 
concentration, when one fixed on dharma directly realizes the truth 
of cessation. Or, (1) emptiness-concentration, when the yogi does 
not see beings or factors, (2) signless concentration, when he has no 
concepts of these things, and (3) aimless concentration. Again, (1) 
the emptiness of the empty , when the yogi sees the five aggregates 
which are empty as empty, (2) the aimlessness of the aimless, when 
one becomes disinterested in aimlessness, and (3) the signlessness 
of the signless, when one loses the concept of conceptlessness. 

158.(E387-389; T367-369) (1) There is the cultivation of 
concentration leading to worldly satisfaction in the second trance. 
(2) There is the cultivation of concentration leading to knowledge, 
viz., the eight liberations and the vision of the ten kytsnayatanas 
(see 172 below). (3) There is the cultivation of concentration 
leading to the understanding of the aggregates. (4) And there is the 
cultivation of concentration leading to the destruction of 
contaminants. 

159.(E389-395; T369-374) The four unlimited concentrations are 
loving kindness, compassion, sympathy, and equanimity. 

160.(E395-396; T374-375) The five limbs of noble concentration 
are joy, satisfaction, purity of awareness, illumination, and 
cultivation. 

161.(E396-398; 1375-378) The six concentrations are (1) 


TATTVASIDDHI 305 


cultivation (of one-pointedness) which is repeated), (2) the same 
when it arouses knowledge and vision (see above), (3) the same 
when both results follow, (4) cultivation of knowledge and vision in 
discerning the different natures of the factors that leads to one- 
pointed concentration; (5) the same leading to more knowledge- 
vision, (6) the same leading to both. Alternative interpretations 
attributed to "Abhidharmikas" are considered and rejected. 

162.(E399-400; T378-379)** Seven concentrations. 

163.(E400-405; T379-384) Eight liberations. 

164.(E405; T385) Eight overcoming senses. 

165.(E405-408; T385-388) There are the four trance states and 
the four immaterial ones plus the cessation-trance. The first trance 
involves the pleasure of seclusion, being free from sensual desires 
and from bad factors but with initial and sustained thought still 
operating. The concentrator is subject to distractions and 
contaminants. 

166.(E409-412; T388-3920 The second trance is like the first, but 
now free from initial and sustained thought, featuring one- 
pointedness of mind a'd inward serenity. Here the concentrator is 
not distracted. The pleasure of this state comes from concentration, 
not from seclusion. The concentrator is still subject to contaminants, 
being subject to the self-notion. 

167.(E412-413; T392-394) In the third trance the yogi is 
nonattached to pleasure; he is mindful, experiences satisfaction in 
his body from praise of his accoiplishments, though neutral with 
regard to it. 

168.(E413-415; T394-396) The fourth trance involves the purity 
of neutrality, where neither satisfaction nor frustration are felt since 
there are no feelings. Here breathing stops since it is based on a 
stable body and mind. There is still a subtle residue of desire. 

169.(E415-418; T396-399) Having passed beyond all material 
designations all designations of obstacles are put down as well as all 
kinds of designations about plurality. The yogi concentrates on 
space and enters the realm of endless space. Here "material 
designations" means the designations of color, taste, smell and 
touch; "designations of obstacles" means the obstacles created by the 
material designations; and "designations about plurality" covers all 
sorts of ideas about bells, drums, etc. These three kinds of 
designations cause various afflictions, actions and frustrations. The 


306 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


yogi passes beyond them all, realizing that matter, etc., are really 
empty like space, that the body was previously with space. 

Objection: Space is by nature a material sense, so how can the 
yogi, taking that as his supporting object, pass beyond material 
designation? 

Answer: Since space is unconditioned, it does not exist as an 
entity. 

Objection: When color arises space is destroyed; so it is an entity. 

Answer: No, nothing is destroyed when color arises, since the 
absence of color is space. And an absence cannot be made into 
another absence. We don't see space or any other absence. And it is 
not situated anywhere, as the elements, e.g., are. 

170.(E419-421; T399-402) The yogi in turn then attains the 
sense of endless consciousness, the sense of nothingness, and the 
sense of neither-identification--nor- nonidentification. In the first he 
concentrates on limitless consciousness, in the second on nothing, 
and finally, realizing that he is taking nothing as something and that 
he gets no respite from identifications by concentrating on 
something or nothing, he stops thinking altogether. 

171.(E421-428; T402-409) There are two kinds of cessation- 
trance: destructive of afflictions and not destructive of them. In the 
latter, though volition has ceased, there are other fetters; the former 
is the eighth liberation that is the same as the noble result, where 
all afflictions have been destroyed. 

Objection: This trance cannot be free from awareness, since no 
one exists without awareness. One without awareness is dead. 
Rather, it must be that the one who enters liberation with residues 
has his afflicted awareness cease, while the one who achieves 
liberation without residues is one whose unafflicted awareness 
ceases also. 

Answer: This state is different from death: breath and 
temperature persist, though awareness ceases, whereas in death all 
three cease. When the siitra says that the three (breath, temperature 
and consciousness) are inseparable it means in the realms of desire 
and in the material realm. But in the immaterial realm there is 
breath and consciousness without temperature. 

The yogi who leaves the cessation-trance does so gradually, 
coming to have three contacts: unchangeable, contact with empty 
awareness of conditioned elements; signless, not taking them as 


TATTVASIDDHI 307 


objects; and thus aimless, having no desire for those elements. This 
state of having woken up from nirvana is not tainted with 
contaminants and involves no self-awareness. 

172.(E428-430; T409-410) The power of awareness that is strong 
enough to shift attention from an old object is an all-inclusive sense. 
The yogi takes a limited sign for his meditation and then deepens 
it by resolve. This resolve has ten sorts--that concentrated on the 
four basic colors, on the four great elements, on space and on 
consciousness. The point is that these resolves artificially create 
signs of those kinds. 

173-180.(E430-445; T411-421) The ten identifications are: 
noneternality, frustration, non-self, antipathy toward food, disgust 
with the world, unpleasantness, death, abandonment, 
nonattachment, and cessation. The advantages of each are set forth. 

181-184.(E445-465; T421-438) There are eleven preliminaries to 
concentration: pure conduct, right-knowledge-gain, protection of the 
sense doors, taking limited food, being awake at the first and last 
parts of the night, possessing good initial thought, possessing good 
resolve, effort, possessic:: of the liberation-sense, nonobscuration, 
nonattachment. 

185.(E465-470; T438-442) Breathing. 

186.(E471-475; T442-448) Pollutions of concentration. 

187.(E476-479; T448-451) Calmness and insight. 

188.(E480-485; T452-458) Cultivation of concentration. 


CHAPTER TWO: Knowledge 


189.(E485-494; T458-467) Knowledge is wisdom about the 
nature of things. The nature of things is empty non-self. In the 
sphere of nominal designation it is wisdom, but conceptual 
identification is not knowledge since it grasps only conventional 
things. 

Objection: But the siitras tell us that consciousness cognizes the 
aggregates, elements and senses; these are not conventional things. 
Conventional things are those that arise in connection with impure 
awareness. The Buddha says there are two right views, worldly and 
otherworldly. The former comprises knowledge of factors, 
inferential knowledge and knowledge of others, and that 
identifications of previous births and of birth and death are impure. 


308 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


So there must be impure wisdom. 

Answer: If there is impure wisdom you will have to explain the 
distinction between impure and pure knowledge, and you can't do 
so. You think there is worldly knowledge about things that are not 
nominal designations (i.e., conventional things). But the Buddha 
teaches that worldly wisdom is awareness which involves the I- 
notion. You say the Buddha speaks of two kinds of worldly wisdom, 
two right views. I say there are two kinds of awareness, confused 
awareness and knowledge. The former has nominal factors as its 
objects, the latter has empty non-self as its object. 

Objection: If you are right, then the noble person will be 
ignorant, since he has awarenesses of pots, etc. 

Answer: The noble person has destroyed all nominal designations 
at his enlightenment. Though he talks of pots he does not have 
awarenesses having pots, etc., as supporting objects. There are three 
kinds of talk: (1) born of (wrong) views, (2) born of pride, (3) born 
of purposive action. Ordinary folk who talk of pots talk the first 
way. Learners, though they have learned the no-self doctrine, still 
in forgetfulness speak of the five aggregates, etc., as self, pot, etc. 
The noble person's talk is of the third kind. 

As for the siitra about the two right views, both kinds are 
identifications and merely spoken of as "knowledge" by the Buddha 
for the edification of certain levels of aspirants. 

190.(E494-499; 1467-474) Objection: One does not reach 
liberation merely by seeing the truth of cessation, as you claim. The 
Buddha says all four truths must be seen, and that these come to be 
seen gradually. 

Answer: The seeing of the truth of cessation is the path, the 
seeing of the other three is the investigation leading to it. Why do 
you think the path involves seeing all four truths? 

Objection: Because the time of gaining the path is the point at 
which knowledge of the abandonment of the afflictions occurs. 

Answer: But the knowledge of the aggregates, etc., arises for the 
abandoning of the afflictions also. 

The yogi may start, e.g., by realizing that there is no such thing 
as "woman" or "man", that such talk is deluded and perverse. Then 
meditating on matter as empty, he gradually comes to the 
realization that all the aggregates are empty and without a self. 
Until he comes to the full realization his vision of awareness is not 


TATTVASIDDHI 309 


pure. Finally, when he fully realizes the truth of cessation his 
afflictions are destroyed. It is only at this point that his identification 
of frustrations is completed. At that precise moment desire and the 
other fetters are abandoned. 

191.(E499-505; 1474-480) The knowledge of all things as 
supporting object ranges over all the elements and senses, etc., and 
includes everything, even the associated factors. So this knowledge 
has itself as supporting object. 

Objection: The siitra says that consciousness arises from two 
causal conditions. So knowledge cannot have itself as its supporting 
object. 

Answer: There is no such rule that consciousness must arise from 
causal conditions. Knowledge may even be without supporting 
object, e.g., mental awareness, as well as awarenesses of past and 
future. The siitra says this only to deny that four conditions are 
required in certain cases. 

Objection: Past and future objects must exist. Otherwise how 
could they be known? There is ho awareness of nonexistents such 
as hare's horn, etc. 

Answer: Knowledge arises with regard to a thing's function. Past 
and future things have no function, and so knowledge cannot arise 
with regard to them. When the time of seeing a person is past, one 
remembers the pastness of that. There is no factor of memory. The 
hare's horn is not remembered, since it never occurred. So no 
knowledge is possible of it. But there must be consciousness of 
hare's horn; if not, how can we be talking of it? 

Objection: A hare's horn is not something we can be conscious of, 
since we are not aware of any qualities that would be qualities of it, 
like shortness or length or color. Likewise, there is no consciousness 
of past things and future things. 

Answer: The power of the knowledge of a noble person can make 
known something as yet nonexistent, just as we have the power of 
remembering something nonexistent. Just as visual consciousness 
does not cause the conceptual constructions of woman and man but 
mental consciousness nevertheless produces such constructions, so 
likewise the noble persons produce the knowledge of nonexistent 
things. 

Objection: The Buddha says that all factors are without self. So 
the knowledge we are talking about ranges over everything, 


310 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


conditioned and unconditioned, and not just the aggregates. 

Answer: "All" has two senses, one including the entire universe, 
the other only a part of that. When the Buddha says, e.g., "I am all- 
knowing" he is utilizing the first sense. In the present case, 
however, the second sense is in use, as also in "all is ablaze", which 
does not mean that the unconditioned and pure things are ablaze. 

192.(ESO05-507; T480-481) Noble dwelling. 

193.(E507-510; T481-485) What is the difference between right 
knowledge and right vision or view? There is no difference. 

Objection: The marks of each that you have mentioned are not 
the same. E.g., patience is a mark of vision, not of knowledge, since 
if the patience of dharma toward frustration is knowledge, it is 
already known and would so constitute the faculty of 
understanding, not the sense that I am going to know. 

Answer: Patience is itself knowledge, since "patience" is a 
synonym for "interest". 

Objection: The fivefold sensuous consciousness which constitutes 
wisdom is knowledge, not view. These five are nonconceptual, 
because they go to their object for the first time, whereas a view is 
a thought that relies on the presentation of an object. 

Answer: Your assumption is that the visual consciousness has as 
its object the stream of factors just like the mental consciousness, so 
neither should be view, which is absurd. Actually, the fivefold 
sensuous consciousness, being without understanding, not true, and 
adverting only to the nominal, is neither knowledge, wisdom nor 
view. 

Some say that the visual organ is the viewer. But it is not, 
because (we hold) the visual consciousness takes an object. So the 
opinion mentioned is only a worldly notion. 

194.(E510-517; T485-492).*” The three kinds of wisdom are the 
wisdom born of hearing, of thinking, and of contemplation. All are 
obtained in the realm of desire. 

195.(E517-519; T493-494) The four discriminations are (1) with 
reference to syllables, (2) with reference to speech, (3) with 
reference to both, (4) with reference to neither. They are obtained 
through the actions in previous births. 

196.(E519-522; T494-497) The five knowledges are (1) 
knowledge of the origination of factors, (2) knowledge of the 
cessation of factors, (3) awareness of nonpassion, by which 





TATTVASIDDHI 311 


knowledge one does not quarrel with others, (4) unobstructed 
knowledge of everything, which only the Buddha has, (5) when the 
yogi secures complete mastery over the continuation or ending of 
his life. 

There is a discussion over whether nirvana is a factor. The 
question is how there can be knowledge of nirvana if there is no 
factor answering to what is known by it. Harivarman replies that 
there is no such factor, that the concentration on nirvana is signless, 
without concept. If nirvana were a factor then one could never have 
the vision that it has no essential nature, since the (alleged) factor 
would never cease. 

197.(E522-528; T497-505) The six higher faculties are (1) the 
yogi's powers of moving his body long distances and appearing and 
disappearing through his power of concentration, (2) the divine eye, 
the yogi's power of seeing all parts of the universe, which is not to 
be confused with wisdom, (3) the divine ear, (4) knowledge of the 
awarenesses of others, (5) recollection of former births, and (6) 
knowledge of the cessation of contaminants. Some opinions about 
(4)--that it only grasps awarenesses of others that are similar (either 
impure or pure) to one's own, or that it cannot grasp the truths 
about the path, are dismissed as being unnecessary restrictions. (4) 
has three varieties, (a) that obtained from signs, when one knows 
the thoughts of others through bodily signs and mantras, (b) that 
obtained from the maturation of karma, which belongs to asuras, (c) 
that obtained through cultivation, which arises from meditation and 
concentration. 

(5) Recollection of former births is the recollection of one's own 
past aggregates as well as those of others. It too has three varieties: 
(a) obtained from cultivation, (b) obtained as maturation by asuras, 
and (c) productive of memory of oneself among humans, obtained 
by noninjury to living things. ; 

(6) The sixth higher faculty, knowledge of the cessation of 
contaminants, is the diamond-like concentration gained upon 
completion of the path when the contaminants and obstruction to 
the path have ceased. Tirthikas can only have the first five faculties-- 
the sixth is unavailable to them, since they cannot grasp the truth. 

Question: Since the knowledge of no-self destroys all concepts 
and thus causes the afflictions to cease, what is the need for a 
subsequent knowledge of this sort? 


312 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer: Because though the afflictions and concepts cease they 
arise again. 

Question: If so they may rise up again endlessly and there is no 
possibility of the path of a perfected being. 

Answer: No, there is a final limit. And in any case the noble 
person is not altogether free of concepts, since when he is not in 
concentration concepts are there for him, though they do not pollute 
him. 

198.(E528-529; T504-505) Perseverance of knowledge. 

199.(E529-531; T505-509) Nine knowledges. 

200.(E532-536; T509-515) Ten knowledges. 

201.(E536-538; T515-516) Fourty-four knowledges. 

202.(E538-540; T516-518) Seventy-seven knowledges. 


127. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Subahupariprechasitra**® 
128. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Sukasiitra*”” 


129. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, 
Samantabhadrabodhisattvadhayaricayadharmasitra**° 


130. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, 


Bhaisajyaguruvaidtiryaprabhasyapiirvapranidhanavisesa- 
vistarastitra®®! 


Summary from Nalinaksha Dutt's translation of Paul Pelliot's 
French rendition 


"The Buddha arrives at Vaisali; he is surrounded by all the beings 
of the worlds. Majijugrtkumara stands up and requests the Tathagata 
to give an exposition of the vows made formerly by the past 
Buddhas for. rescuing the living beings from the miseries of 
existence. Bhagavan grants the request and explains the twelve 
vows taken formerly, when he was a bodhisattva, by a Buddha 
whose world is separated from ours by Buddhaksetras, the number 
of which is ten times the number of the sands of the Ganges; that 





a 


BHAISAJYAGURU 313: 


Buddha is Yao-che-lieou-li-kouang-jou-lai (Bhaisajyaguruvaidirya- 
prabha); he lives in the world Tsing-lieou-li. He wished that he 
himself might attain bodhi, be pure and resplendent as the vaidtirya 
(mani), and illumine the world immersed in darkness; he wished 
that his name if uttered might cure maladies, release the prisoners, 
change into men those women who are sick of their miserable 
condition, procure food for the famished, or clothes for the 
destitute. In short, in that world, for innumerable kalpas there 
would be neither suffering nor poverty; there would be no more 
feminine beings, nor beings in inferior states of existence; the soil 
would be of vaidtirya, ropes of gold would line the routes; the walls 
and the houses would be made of seven jewels and one would 
believe it to be the western Sukhavati...It will suffice only to think 
of his name for deliverance from all evils...If one makes an image of 
this Buddha, or if one recites the text of the stitra, he will escape 
from the nine ways of death..." ; 


131. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Mahdyanabhidharmasitra*** 
132. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Buddhabhiimisttra*** 
Summary by John P. Keenan 


"The text opens with an introduction which describes the Buddha, 
the Pure Land in which he preaches this scripture, and the gathered 
assembly of bodhisattvas, mahasravakas, and mahasattvas. The body 
of the work treats the five factors which constitute the Buddha land: 
the pure Dharma realm, Mirror wisdom, Equality wisdom, 
Discernment wisdom, and Duty-fulfillment wisdom. Each of these 
factors is described by a series of ten descriptions or similes. The 
Pure Dharma realm is compared to empty space, which pervades all 
places without itself being in any way delimited. Mirror wisdom is 
likened to a round mirror which reflects all images without 
discrimination. Equality wisdom is simply described in ten 
statements on the equality of all things. Discernment wisdom is 
described by drawing comparisons from the world and its contents. 
Duty-fulfillment wisdom is understood through analogy with the 
actions of sentient beings in the world. In effect, the first two 
wisdoms correspond to the Yogacara notion of Nondiscriminative 


314 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


wisdom (nirvikalpajfiana) and the last two to subsequently attained 
wisdom (prsthalabdhajfiana). Both focus on the pure Dharma realm 
as the space of emptiness and the sphere of compassion." 

"The concluding section of this scripture offers two similes to 
illustrate the nature of the wisdom described, now identified as a 
phenomenal wisdom all of one unified taste. The first simile depicts 
the luxurious grove of the gods wherein they lose any sense of their 
individual identities, drawing the analogy that entry into the 
Dharma realm of emptiness leads to the wisdom insight into the 
equality of all beings. The second simile notes the same point by 
describing the flow of all rivers and streams to the oneness of the 
great ocean." 

"Four verses then summarize the meaning of the entire text." 


133. DHARMATRATA, Samyuktabhidharmahrdayasastra 
Summary by Bart Dessein 


This work is also known as Ksudrakabhidharmahrdayasastra, 
Abhidharmasaraprakimnakasastra, | Samyuktabhidharmasara, _ or 
Misrakabhidharmahrdayasastra. It is available in Chinese (T. 1552). 
The Chinese translation of the work was made by Samghavarman 
in Ch'ang-kan monastery in Chien-k'ang, capital of the Former Sung 
in 434 A.D. 34 The author Dharmatrata is the second of three 
persons so named, the first of which is Bhadanta Dharmatrata, a 
Darstantika and one of the -four masters mentioned in the 
Mahavibhasasastra. Our present author lived in the beginning of the 
fourth century. 

The present work takes the Abhidharmahrdayasastra_ of 
Dharmaéresthin, #21 of Volume 7 of this Encyclopedia, as its 
fundament. All doctrinal deviations in our work are adaptations of 
the Mahavibhasa, which makes the present work posterior to the 
Mahavibhasa. 


CHAPTER ONE: Elements 
1-2. Salutations to the Buddha. 


3-6. Discussion on impure and pure factors 
7-14. and on the five aggregates. 


SAMYUKTABHIDHARMAHRDAYA 315 


15-19. The twelve senses are explained. Ten are said to be 
material. Also, the specific characteristic marks of a thing 
(dravyasvalaksana) and of the sense-organ are discussed. Dharma 
is said to be four kinds of unmanifest matter. Because of the 
difference between basis, supporting object aid specific 
characteristic there are in all eleven senses in one body. 

20-22. The eighteen elements. 

23-26. The difference between aggregates, senses and elements 
is discussed. All factors are said to be elements, the elements senses 
and, except for the three unconditioned ones, aggregates. However, 
the three kinds are spoken of because of the difference in delusion 
of beings, liberation of desire and unequalness of their faculties. 

27-50. The different categories of eighteen elements in respect of 
which are blameworthy or not; good, bad or neutral; with or 
without retribution; atomic or formed; etc. 

51-52. The characteristic marks of the factors. 


CHAPTER TWO: Conditioning Factors 


53-54. Introduction. 

55-60. Factors that are accompanying mental factors and 
dissociated factors are spoken of: factors arising with every 
awareness, arising with every good awareness, with every defiled 
awareness, with every bad awareness, with every awareness of 
minor defilement. 

61-63. In the discussion concerning the simultaneous appearance 
of factors that accompany thought we are told that there are 
eighteen such factors in the obscure-neutral class and twenty-two of 
the good sort. 

64-67. The simultaneous appearance of material factors. The four 
characteristic marks. Four forms of remoteness (diirata): of mark, 
in nature, in place and in time. 

68-76. The six causes. 

77-82. The meaning of the different causes and the simultaneous 
appearance of factors. 

83-88. Four conditions. 

89. Limitation in name as one syllable, in matter as one atom, in 
time as one instant. 

90-93. Increase of matter and the measure of the body of beings 


316 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in the different realms. 

94-95. Increase of time and duration of life of beings in the 
different realms. 

96. Many factors, each formed by many conditioning factors, 
conspire to produce one single factor. 


CHAPTER THREE: Karma 


97-99. Five kinds of birth result from bodily, verbal and mental 
karma. 

100-101. Classification of types of karma. 

102-124. Three unmanifest kinds of action: restraint of the code, 
the act of entering the order; restraint through trance, when one 
acquires good awarenesses in the material realm; pure restraint, 
when one has awarenesses of the four trances. The first of the three 
is abandoned at death, the second abandoned when proceeding to 
a higher or lower trance state, and the third in backsliding or when 
acquiring a noble result with growing faculties. 

125-141. Ten paths of action. 

142-152. Further differences among actions. 

153-163. Five fruits of action: natural (=what is similar), the 
fruit of retribution (=what is dissimilar), the fruit of liberation 
(=abandonment), the fruit of human effort (=what is acquired 
through effort), the dominant fruit (=the single result of many 
factors). In the pure path there are only four fruits (minus the fruit 
of retribution). 

164-171. The three obstructions: action, defilement and 
retribution. Breaking up the order, false views. 


CHAPTER FOUR: Proclivities 


172-180. Seven proclivities are differentiated as to realm, aspect 
and mode of proceeding (thus making ninety-eight). 

181-197. The objects of the ninety-eight proclivities. 

198-206. Ten proclivities. From them come 

207-213. ten envelopers: shamelessness, disregard, lethargy, 
regret, selfishness, envy, excitedness, sleepiness, anger and 
hypocrisy. 


SAM YUKTABHIDHARMAHRDAYA 317 


214-219. The relation between defilements and secondary 
afflictions. 

220-229. Abandonment of defilements 

230-231. There are three kinds of objects--good, bad and neither, 
and two ways of generating craving. 


CHAPTER FIVE: Nobility 


232-234. Spiritual practice distinguished. 

235-237. Four establishments of mindfulness. 

238-240. Four roots of merit: warmth, summit, patience, and the 
highest worldly factor. 

241-265. The noble person in the path of vision. The stages of 
being on the path--stream-enterer, etc.--discussed. 

266-273. The noble person in the path of the adept. 

274-285. The merit of the noble person. 


CHAPTER SIX: Knowledge 


286-290. The ten knowledges as to realm and truths, antidote, 
preparation, etc. 

291-298. Different categories of the ten knowledges. 

299-303. Sixteen aspects of the four truths in relation to the ten 
knowledges. 

304-313. Acquisition of the ten knowledges. 

314-318. The knowledges as to vision or non-vision, wisdom, 
antidote, and as to supporting objects. 

319. Higher faculties. 

320-330. Eighteen unique factors: the ten knowledges plus four 
confidences plus three unique establishments of mindfulness plus 
great compassion. 

331-336. Simultaneous factors 


CHAPTER SEVEN: Concentration 
337-346. The kinds of concentration. 


347-362. Merit produced by concentration. 
363-377. Relationship between concentration and merit. 


318 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


378-379. Magical awareness. 
CHAPTER EIGHT: Siitra 


380. The meaning of "siitra". 

381-399. Four kinds of giving, four kinds of morality, two kinds 
of spiritual practice. Four kinds of restraint. 

400-402. Forty abodes in the three realms: twenty in the realm 
of desire (eight great hells, animal birth, hungry ghosts, four 
continents, six gods of the realm of sexual passion); sixteen in the 
material realm; four in the immaterial realm. Seven abodes of 
consciousness: the good courses of the realm of passion, the three 
lower stages of the material realm, and three lower stages of the 
immaterial realm. 

403-409. Dependent origination. 

410. Birth and the courses of rebirth. 

411. Six elements. 

412-413. Four truths. 

414. Four fruits of monkhood. 

415-416. Characteristic marks of the path. 

417. Four forms of perfect faith. 

418-419. The marks of the development of concentration. 

420-421. Good and conditioned factors produced by effort are the 
footing of supernatural powers. 

422-425. The thirty-seven factors of enlightenment. 

426. Four kinds of nutriment. 

427. Three concentrations in respect to the sixteen aspects. 

428. Four perverted views. 

429-431. Five views. 

432-441. Twenty-two faculties. 

442-445, The object of consciousness and of knowledge. 

446-448. Development of proclivities. 


CHAPTER NINE: Miscellaneous 


453-457. The factors dissociated from awareness. 

465. Acquisition of twelve awarenesses. 

475. The perfected being abides in awarenesses through 
retribution and relating to deportment for parinirvana. 


SAM YUKTABHIDHARMAHRDAYA 319 
CHAPTER TEN: Investigation 
521. The fours kinds of antidote. 
CHAPTER ELEVEN: Discussion 


Twenty puzzles answered. 


134. DHARMATRATA, Paficavastukavibhasa**> 
Summary by Christian Lindmer 


Dharmatrata's commentary (ca. fourth century A.D.) on the 
Pajicavastuka (the first chapter of the Prakaranapada; cf. Volume 7 
of this Encyclopedia, #17) is only extant in Chinese apart from a 
brief Sanskrit fragment. The Chinese version abruptly breaks off in 
the section dealing with the first of the mental phenomena, viz., 
feeling (vedana). On the whole it is a rather independent and 
instructive commentary full of interesting digressions and 
discussions. Among the sources and authorities referred to by 
Dharmatrata are Parsva, Ghosaka, the Vijfianakaya, Jfanaprasthana, 
and Mahavibhdasa as well as a considerable number of siitras and 
some unidentified individuals. 

Vasumitra's Paricavastuka itself is brief and often not explicit. 
Hence the purpose of Dharmatrata's commentary is to make it more 
intelligible by offering a more detailed account of the particular and 
common features of all factors. 

The factors may be classified in various ways. Basically, however, 
the classification into five basic factors called "actual entities" 
(vastu) comprises all of them.- Hence the title Paficavastuka. 

"E" refers to N. Aiyaswami Sastri's text as in Visvabharati Annals 
10, 1961, 1-54 


I. Matter 
(E13-17) A lengthy discussion of the concept of matter. It is the 


first of the five actual entities to be dealt with because it is the 
"most gross" and because meditation on it is the "door" to the 


320 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Buddha's teaching. It is called "matter" not only because it sooner or 
later inevitably breaks up or changes, but also because it, as a 
physical body, indicates one's internal mental states and the 
character of one's previous karma. Some kinds of matter are visible 
and resistant, others, nonmaterial (i.e., the senses), are invisible and 
nonresistant, whereas unmanifest karma is neither. 

(E17-23) (i) There are only four great elements; space is "great", 
but not to be included within matter. A discussion of the etymology 
and function of the four great elements; they are the cause of the 
derived elements. Each of the four elements can operate on its own 
independently of the three others. After this general account of the 
great elements their specific characteristics and their particular 
functions are discussed. It is impossible for a single factor to have 
several characteristics. In fact the elements can never be absolutely 
separated in concreto though their characters are in mutual conflict 
(water with fire, etc.). 

(E23-31) (ii) On the material derivatives, i.e., the senses and 
their objects. Etymology of the term "sense" (indriya): it is the 
"master" of its object. A description of the five senses, their quality, 
specific nature and function. There are three kinds called sabhaga, 
i.e., the eye serving as basis of consciousness, and four kinds called 
tatsabhaga, i.e., the eye as subtle matter. The eye.can only perceive 
a visible object when associated with consciousness. Various 
alternate opinions about perception are discussed. With regard to 
the object of the senses: matter consists of color and shape and is 
cognized first by perceptual consciousness and then by mental 
consciousness. The other objects are sound, smell, taste and part of 
the tangible. 

(E32-35) (iii) Finally there is unmanifest karma. This is material 
and unmanifest. It may either be good or bad. In a long discussion 
the commentary follows the traditional Sarvastivada notions (see 
Mahavibhdasa, etc.) about the division and status of this third and 
final kind of matter. 


II. Awareness 
(E36-40) The second actual entity is awareness (citta). There is 


no real difference between citta, jfidna and vijfidna. Nevertheless the 
different synonyms may be used with different connotations and 


PANCAVASTUKAVIBHASA 321 


specific meanings. Consciousness is classified according to the sense- 
organ that produces it when in contact with an object. 


Ill. Mental Concomitants 


(E40-48) In general, accompanying mental factors or 
concomitants must be distinguished from mind awareness. Various 
absurdities following from not distinguishing accompanying mental 
factors from awareness--the Darstantika view--are pointed out. The 
first mental concomitant is feeling, the awareness of a content. 
There are three kinds of feeling--satisfying, frustrating and one that 
is neither. It is wrong, as some Buddhists do, only to assume the 
existence of frustrating feelings. The commentary ends in the midst 
of a long discussion of other aspects of feeling. 


135. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Arthaviniscayasiitra®®® 
Summary by N.H. Samrani 


This work has been edited several times, and partially translated 
into Italian (by A. Ferrari, unavailable to the editor of this Volume). 
"E" references below are to the edition by N.H.Samtani in Tibetan 
Sanskrit Works Series 13, Patna 1971. This summary has been 
prepared by the editor on the |). sis of Samtani's summary of the 
contents of the work. Numbered sections below refer to siitras. 


(E1-3) Introduction. The stitra is addressed to 2500 monks by the 
Buddha when he was staying in Mrgamata's palace. 

1.(E3) Five aggregates. 

2.(E3) Five aggregates involving appropriating. 

3.(E4) Eighteen elements. 

4.(E4) Twelve sense-bases. 

5.(E5-14) Twelvefold chain of dependent origination. 
Ignorance is subdivided into about thirty varieties. Conditioning 
factors have three varieties: bodily, vocal and mental. The 
consciousness-bodies (vijfiGnakaya) are six, corresponding to the six 
organs including mind. As for name-and-form (the psycho-physical 
complex), there are four names--feeling, identification, trace and 


322 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


consciousness--and one form--matter. Matter is further subdivided 
into four great elements (earth, water, light and wind elements). 
Each is defined. The sense-bases and contacts are counted as six 
each, as are the feelings and desires. As for appropriating, it is 
subdivided into four: appropriating from desire, from (wrong) 
views, from moral precepts and vows, and from view of self. The 
realms of existence (bhava) are ‘three: sensual, material and 
immaterial. These are further subdivided. The sensual realm is 
divided into eight hot hells, eight cool hells. This realm includes 
ghosts, animals, men and six kinds of sensual realm gods termed 
caturmaharajikas, trayastimsas, yamas, tusitas, nirmanaratis and 
paranirmitavasavatimas. The material realm includes sixteen kinds 
of gods: brahmakayikas, brahmapurohitas, mahabhramanas, 
parittabhas, apramdnas, abhasvaras, parittasubhas, subhakrtsnas, 
anabhrakas, punyaprasavas, brhatphalas, avrhas, atapas, sudras, 
sudarsanas, and akanisthas. The immaterial realm includes the bases 
of endless space, endless consciousness, nothingness and neither- 
identification-nor-nonidentification. These four kinds of immaterial 
gods are termed "immersed in consciousness only" 
(cittamatradhyayana). 

6, (E14-16) Four noble truths. 

7.(E16) Twenty-two faculties. 

8.(E17) Four meditative states, described but not named. 

9.(E18) Four formless meditative attainments. 

10.(E18-19) Four sublime — states--kindness, compassion, 
sympathy, equanimity. 

11.(E19-22) Four modes of progress, two frustrating, two 
satisfying. 

12.(E22-28) Four meditative practices: that which is undertaken 
to destroy desire, that undertaken to obtain the satisfaction of the 
dharma, that undertaken to achieve knowledge and correct view, 
and that undertaken to achieve wisdom. 

13.(E28) Four establishments of mindfulness. 

14.(E29) Four right efforts. 

15.(E30-31) Four supernatural powers. 

16.(E31-33) Five faculties. 

17.(E33) Five powers--faith, energy, mindfulness, concentration, 
wisdom. 


18.(E33-34) Seven constituents of enlightenment--of mindfulness, 


ARTHAVINISCAYA 323 


discrimination of the factors, energy, joy, tranquillity, concentration 
and equanimity. 

19.(E34-42 The eightfold path. 

20.(E42-45) Sixteen kinds of mindfulness about breathing. 

21.(E45-47) Four constituents of attaining the stream. 

22.(E48-49) Ten powers of the Tathagata. 

23.(E49-51) Four grounds of confidence (or of fearlessness) of a 
Buddha. 

24.(E51-52) Four discriminations of the Tathagata--of things, of 
dharma, of usage, and of perspicuity. 

25.(E52-53) Eighteen special characteristics of the Buddha. 

26.(E53-62) Thirty-two marks of a great person. 

27.(E63-68) Eighty minor marks of a Buddha. 


136. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Samdhinirmocanasiitra 


"T" references are to the French translation by Etienne Lamotte 
(Louvain 1935, 1962).°°”? An English translation and extersive 
discussion of sizable sections of the work are found in John Powers, 
Hermeneutics and Tradition in the Samdhinirmocana-Sitra (Leiden, 
1993). "P" references are to the pages of Powers' book. 

One passage (T206-207) in Chapter Seven of this work is of such 
importance that we have ventured to provide a complete translation 
of it. It explicitly addresses the relationship between Abhidharma, 
Madhyamaka and Yogacara in a remarkable fashion. 

This work is "wholly incorporated in the Viniscayasamgrahani 
section of 166.Yogacarabhiimi"* 


CHAPTER ONE 


1-6.(T169-172; P42-45) "Conditioned" and "unconditioned" are 
explained as metaphorical terms whose meaning is a conventional 
or nominal designation. The noble ones understaiid it but it is 
actually ineffable. Why then are these terms "conditioned" and 
"unconditioned" invented? It is as when a magician explains his trick 
to a pupil: likewise, the noble ones have invented these terms 
"conditioned" and “unconditioned” to describe the indescribable 
nature of things. 


324 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
CHAPTER TWO 


1-4.(T172-174; P47-53) The ultimate truth (paramartha) is 
intuitively known to the nobles, but is a matter of speculative 
tradition for (some?) ordinary folk, who fall to quarrelling over it. 
The ultimate belongs to the signless realm beyond argumentation; 
it is ineffable and free from conventions of language. 


CHAPTER THREE 


1-7.(T175-178; P54-60) Question: Some say that the 
conventional and the ultimate (truths) are the same, others that 
they are different. Which is right? If they're the same ordinary folk 
would see the truth and be liberated. If they are different, even 
seers of truth would not attain liberation. 

Answer: The conventional and the ultimate are neither the same 
nor different in nature. But the obstacles of images and impotence 
can be overcome by attaining insight (vipasyana) and achieving 
peace (Samatha). 


CHAPTER FOUR 


1-12.(T178-182; 61-64) Subhiiti reviews a number of 
Abhidharma notions--aggregates, signs, origination, destruction, 
cessation, dependent origination, four truths, eighteen elements, 
four establishments of mindfulness, four supernatural powers, five 
faculties, five powers, seven or eight limbs of enlightenment. The 
ones who teach the differences among these ignore the highest 
truth, he says. 

Buddha: You are right. The highest, the pure object, is not 
heterogeneous in character; it is understood by mystics. It cannot be 
caused or conditioned. If it were, one would have to seek something 
even more basic. But whether Tathagatas arise or not, the element 
of factors (dharmadhatu) is necessarily established. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


1-3.(T183-185) In the material world there are six courses. But 
at the beginning of each life in any of these courses two things are 


SAMDHINIRMOCANA 325 


furnished from the seeds (bija) which appropriate (adana) two 
things: the material organs for the body and the traces (vdsana) of 
signs, words and conceptual constructions. The consciousness that 
results is called the "appropriating consciousness" (adanavijriana); 
it is also called the "storehouse consciousness" (dlayavijfiana), 
because in it the seeds are stored. 

4.(T185) With this appropriating consciousness as base six groups 
of awarenesses are born: visual, auditory, olfactory, linguistic, bodily 
and mental. Visual awareness has as its base the eye together with 
consciousness and shape. Simultaneously with it functions a mental 
awareness (manovijfiana) which.has the same base. Even if several 
kinds of awareness function at the same time, only one mental 
awareness, having a single content, occurs. 


CHAPTER SIX 


1-7.(T188-189) Things are of three natures: constructed 
(parikalpita), dependent (paratantra) and perfected (parinispanna). 
The constructed nature involves specification of the things known 
by conventional names, couched in current language. The dependent 
nature is things involved in dependent origination, following the 
causal principle derived from traces conditioned by ignorance and 
causing the arising of frustrations. The perfected nature is the true 
nature of things known to Bodhisattvas through their energy and 
attention derived from spiritual practice; it arises based on superior 
enlightenment. 

The constructed is the illusion of one affected with a diseased eye 
(timira); the dependent is the signs--hair, color, jewel--conditioning 
the one with the disease; and the perfected is the actual object, the 
proper domain of clear vision. 

8-12.(189-191) A transparent crystal will be seen as having 
fantasized properties born from linguistic associations (the 
constructed); the colors with which these properties are associated 
is the dependent; the perpetual nonexistence of any such properties 
or color is the perfected. 

The constructed is cognized as a qualitative form dependent on 
names attached to signs. The dependent is cognized depending on 
the insistence on the constructed nature as belonging to the 
perfected nature. The perfected is cognized depending on the 


326 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


insistence on the constructed nature as not belonging to the 
dependent. Bodhisattvas understand precisely the imaginary 
character attributed to the dependent: they know accurately that 
things are without characteristics, are "stainless". And thus they 
know their purity. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


1-9.(T192-195; P85-122) Question: Since the Buddha spoke of 
five aggregates, four truths, eighteen bases, etc. and also has 
affirmed that everything is without a specific characteristic, is 
unborn, undestroyed, calm from the outset, liberation--why do you 
lay all this (above) on us? 

Answer: Good question! Listen. There are three ways of being 
unreal, without a specific characteristic (nihsvabhava): relating to 
character, to birth and to the highest. The unreality of character is 
the constructed nature; things arise from language and not by 
themselves. The unreality of birth is the dependent nature; things 
are born from conditions, not by or from themselves. The highest 
unreality is the perfected nature, the pure supporting object devoid 
of character like a sky-flower or like space. This triple unreality 
shows that everything is without an essential nature, that nothing 
is born or destroyed; all is calm, essentially liberated, cannot be 
born or die. 

10-13.(T196-198) To those who have not planted good roots or 
purified the obstacles etc. this dharma of unreality is preached. To 
understand this is to undertand that the traces are causally 
conditioned, impermanent, unstable, changing; thus one will grow 
to detest these traces. 

But even those who plant good roots and accumulate merit do 
not cognize exactly in the unreality of birth either the unreality of 
character or the double unreality of the highest unreality. It is to 
them that the Buddha teaches the dharma of these two sorts of 
unreality. Following that dharma they will no longer cling to the 
characteristics of the dependent nature, will examine and penetrate 
them exactly. 

14-16.(T198-199) It is by this single vehicle (ekaydna) that 
disciples, self-enlightened ones and Bodhisattvas attain to liberation. 
There is no other path, though not every one is astute enough to 


SAMDHINIRMOCANA 327 


appreciate that. E.g., a disciple whose compassion is mediocre and 
whose fear of frustration is extreme will not thus achieve liberation, 
but when he turns toward illumination I deem him a Bodhisattva, 
though given his nature at the outset he is still referred to as 
"disciple". 

18-23.(T199-202) Some who have planted good roots, purified 
the obstacles, ripened their series, etc., honest by nature, because 
they are nonintellectual, do not precisely comprehend my teaching, 
though they adhere to it, speak the Buddha's word and praise him. 
Incapable of meditation they still by their store of merit and 
understanding grow to fullness and arrive at the goal. 

Others who lack some of these features will fail. Some of these 
remain complacent in their error. Others, not complacent, explicitly 
reject the correct interpretation and fall into great misery, attaining 
covering by karma (karmavarana). These include intellectual types 
who deny that the correct teaching is that of the Buddha: while this 
is easy to say it will take millions of eons for the karma it produces 
to disappear. 

(T206-207)*° "The bodhisattva Paramarthasamudgata said to 
the Buddha: 'In Benares, at Rsipatana in the Deer Park, the Blessed 
One first turned the wheel of doctrine, demonstrating the four noble 
truths for the followers of the hearers' vehicle. This turning of the 
wheel was marvellous and wonderful; it was such as nobody in the 
world, neither gods nor men, has turned before. Nevertheless, there 
were superior doctrines. This [first turning] gave rise to criticism, 
needed interpretation, and became an object of controversy. So then 
the Blessed One, with an implicit intention, turned the wheel for the 
second time for the sake of the followers of the great vehicle, - 
explaining that all things are without essence, do not arise, are not 
destroyed, are quiescent from the beginning, and are originally in 
cessation. Nevertheless, there were teachings superior to this, for 
this also gave rise to criticism, needed interpretation, and became 
an object of controversy. So the Blessed One, with an explicit 
intention, turned the wheel a third time for the sake of the followers 
of all vehicles, explaining that all things are without essence, do not 
arise, are not destroyed, are quiescent from the beginning, and are 
originally in cessation. This turning of the wheel is absolutely 
marvellous and wonderful. It is unsurpassed, and does not give rise 
to criticism: it is explicit and does not become an object of 


328 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
controversy." 
CHAPTER EIGHT 


1-8.(T209-213) The Buddha speaks of peace and insight. A series 
of questions exploring these two notions receive appropriate 
answers. Peace has construction not involving (conceptual) 
reflecting, whereas insight deals with constructions involving 
reflection. 

Question: Are peace and insight distinct paths? Answer: Yes and 
no. Peace involves thoughts understood through insight, but minus 
the images that are found in insight. 

Question: Are these images different from those of ordinary 
thought. Answer: No, they are only ideas. Indeed, I have said that 
every object is ideation-only (vijfaptimatrata). 

Question: Can one have an idea of an idea. Answer: Sure, an idea 
can be of anything, but not be different from its content. E.g., a 
reflection in a mirror isn't really different from the awareness of it-- 
it's not really "out there". 

9-39.(T213-235) Peaceful awareness grasps fetterless contents, 
while insight grasps ideas of objects. In one-pointed concentration 
one practises peace and insight at the same time, recognizing its 
content to be only an idea. 

Varieties of peace and insight are compared. They can be mixed, 
when one collects factors into a group and thinks of them as truth, 
illuminating, liberation, revolution at the basis (asrayaparavrtti), 
good factors, etc. Such a meditation is analyzed as (1) demolishing 
the depravity (dausthulya) in each factor contemplated, (2) 
suppressing their differences and enjoying the happiness of dharma, 
(3) perfectly understanding their brilliance, (4) producing 
appropriate notions reflecting one's accomplishment of duty, 
purification and nonreflection, (5) attaining perfection and realizing 
the dharmakaya. 

This procedure is re-analyzed by other methods. For example, 
knowing the dharma by knowing names, phrases, phonemes, 
knowing them separately and in tandem. Or again, knowing them 
under ten aspects of extension, essence, grasper, grasped, residence, 
enjoyment, error, nonerror, pollution and purification. (These are 
only two of a number of such methods.) The discussion covers a 


1 aap on A ptm eng at Ah an 


—— 


SAMDHINIRMOCANA 329 


whole series of relations to other Buddhist notions such as thusness, 
calculation, emptiness, distractions, obstructions, antidotes, etc. 
assigned to ten stages (dasabhiimi), concluding with an explanation 
that in liberation all feelings are destroyed and a classification of 
feelings. 


CHAPTER NINE 


1-5.(T236-242) The ten stages. Four purifications, eleven aspects, 
twenty-two delusions and eleven depravities are assigned to 
appropriate stages among the ten. ‘ 

6-8.(T242-243) Eight purifications (visuddhi): of intention, 
awareness, compassion, virtue, of the view of and service to the 
Buddha, of maturation, birth and ability. The Bodhisattva is extolled 
for his pure roots, clairvoyance, compassion for all beings, and 
unsulliedness. 

9-31.(T243-255) Ten perfections: the usual six--giving, morality, 
patience, energy, ecstasy and wisdom--plus four more: helping 
others, energetic helping, attention, and ecstatic practices. Their 
features, applications, good and bad ways of assisting, karmic 
results, source, causes and defilements. 

32-34.(T255-256) Reversion to the single-path theme. 


CHAPTER TEN 


1-4.(T257-258) The three bodies of the Buddha. The dharmakaya 
is the revolution at the basis, inconceivable, indescribable, and alike 
for disciple and those self-enlightened. 

5-8.(T258-267) Sutra, vinaya, matrka and dharani explained. 

9.(1267-268) The effortless awareness of the Tathagata. 

12.(T269-270) The easy and the difficult path distinguished. 


137. PINGALA, Akutobhayd on Nagarjuna's 
Madhyamakakarikas*” 
Remarks by C. W. Huntington, Jr. 


The Akutobhaya survives only in a Tibetan translation done some 


330 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


time during the first half of the ninth century. Our earliest known 
reference to the text is found in the Chinese biography of Nagarjuna 
translated (or perhaps composed) by Kuméarajiva in 405 A.D. 
Regardless of whether or not the biography actually dates back to 
the first half of the fourth century, as internal evidence suggests, we 
can be certain that along wish the most ancient Madhyamaka texts 
the Chinese inherited from India a tradition that Nagarjuna was the 
author of an autocommentary (svavrtti) on the Mulamadhya- 
makakarikas entitled Akutobhaya, or simply Abhayasastra (wu wei 
lun). Tibetan translators of the Madhyamaka literature also 
preserved this tradition in their catalogues and in the colophon to 
the Akutobhaya, as well as at the close of every chapter, where the 
text is specifically attributed to Nagarjuna. Despite this undeniable 
evidence of what must have been a very old Indian tradition, aside 
from the testimony provided in the Akutobhaya itself we. presently 
know of only two Indian texts which explicitly refer to an 
autocommentary on the karikds.**' Obviously there was some 
awareness of this tradition, and just as certainly the original texts of 
the Akutobhayda was circulated, in some form, within the most 
ancient Indian Madhyamaka community. Yet not one of the 
principal Indian Madhyamikas mentions such a treatise. Even 
Buddhapilita fails to acknowledge his debt to this earlier work, 
although his own very famous commentary is identical to the 
Akutobhayad in many places. It remains a tantalizing mystery as to 
why later Indian Madhyamikas almost totally neglected both this 
particular commentary and the tradition surrounding it. Largely 
because of this neglect, and also on account of a citation in the 
Akutobhaya lifted directly from the work of Nagarjuna's disciple 
Aryadeva, most Tibetan scholars strongly contested any internal 
evidence that the text had been written by Nagarjuna himself. 

The situation becomes even more mysterious when we examine 
the relationship between the Akutobhayd and the Chinese Chung- 
lun, a commentary on the Milamadhyamakakarikds variously 
attributed to more than one otherwise unknown author. A close 
comparison of the Tibetan text of the Akutobhaya with the Chung- 
lun reveals that the two commentaries most definitely stem from a 
single, original Indian (probably Sanskrit) source that may have 
undergone more or less radical alterations even before it was used 
as a crib for either of these later works. As is the case with 


AKUTOBHAYA 331 


Buddhapilita, once again we find that the author of the Chung-lun 
incorporated lengthy passages from this original source into his own 
commentary. There is also convincing evidence that the Chinese 
translator Kumarajiva went on to perform even more extensive 
editorial revisions before the text of the Chung-lun reached its final 
form. 

On the basis of present knowledge, then, we may quite 
reasonably postulate the existence of an original exegetical tradition 
that circulated through the earliest Indian Madhyamaka community 
along with the Milamadhyamakakarikds. This traditional exegesis 
must necessarily have existed prior to Buddhapalita. The date of 
the Chinese translation of the Chung-lun would provide us with a 
terminus ad quem of 409 A.D. for the first redaction of what may 
have previously been an oral commentary on Nagarjuna's stanzas. 
It seems likely that the Akutobhayd represents an actual recension 
of this first written text, while Buddhapalita composed a 
considerably enlarged version. The Chung-lun would certainly be 
farthest removed from the original. It is not possible to determine 
the earliest form of this commentary, but it may well have contained 
material common to the Akutobhayd, Buddhapilita's vrtti, and the 
Chung-lun. We may also speculate as to what it might have 
excluded. 

Careful analysis of these texts indicates that the Tibetan 
Akutobhaya, like the Chung-lun, is itself the end product of a series 
of editorial redactions. Both Buddhapalita and the Chung-lun 
consistently omit the brief illustrations often included at the close 
of sections of the Akutobhayd that are otherwise taken over 
verbatim. This fact suggests that such illustrations were appended 
at some point after the text had been incorporated into 
Buddhapilita's vrtti and the Chung-lun, or else that these later 
commentaries made use of a different recension of the Indian 
source. One cannot entirely dismiss the possibility that the 
controversial stanza of Aryadeva quoted in Chapter 27 of the 
Akutobhaya was also added to the body of an earlier commentary. 
In any case, it is unlikely that we will ever be able to prove that the 
Tibetan Akutobhaya actually represents Nagarjuna's own work, but 
nevertheless the text is still immensely valuable as a translation of 
the oldest extant version of this most ancient commentary on 
Nagarjuna's karikas. 


332 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The Akutobhaya is a rather brief, straightforward commentary. 
Except for the citation from Aryadeva, it incorporates only a very 
few quotations--all from the sutras. Many explanations confine 
themselves to a restatement of the grammar and syntax of a 
particular karika. The Akutobhaya apparently differs from 
Buddhapalita in its interpretation of a karika in only five 
instances, and none of these differences could be taken as a 
philosophical or doctrinal disagreement. Buddhapilita's vrtti is in 
virtually every respect simply an amplification of the methodology 
and themes of the Akutobhaya, and is in fact to be preferred for its 
more detailed explanations. 

Due to the nature of its close relationship with Buddhapilita's 
vrtti, the Akutobhaya is primarily significant from a text-critical 
rather than a philosophical point of view. It is worth noting, 
however, that the commentary depends exclusively upon very 
simple, reductio ad absurdum argumentation (prasangavakya)--a 
strong indication of the historical priority of this particular 
methodology within the Madhyamaka tradition. 


138. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Larnkavatarasutra*® 


The literature abounds in a great deal of speculation about the 
date and nature of growth of this large work. Some estimate its date 
as preceding Nagarjuna’s, and for other reasons (see below) one 
might be inclined to date it quite a bit later. It is probable that the 
work grew in the same manner that many others covered here did, 
and that it is now impossible to disentangle the various sections, 
much less to date their composition. Lindtner* speaks of an "Ur- 
LS" which he believes was known to Nagarjuna and Aryadeva, 
offering analyses of passages in support. Schmithausen*™, following 
a suggestion of Jikido Takasaki's, suggests that this text quotes 
Vasubandhu's 202.Trimsika and so must postdate that work, but 
Lindtner argues that Vasubandhu knew the Lankavatarasiitra as well 
as the 136.Samdhinirmocanasiitra. 

A thorough review of earlier thoughts about the dating and other 
information about the Chinese and Tibetan versions of this work are 
provided by Daiset Teitaro Suzuki.* The earliest of these, by 
Dharmaraksa, Suzuki estimates as having been composed around 


LANKAVATARA 333 


420-430. It is now lost, but a slightly later translation by 
Gunabhadra in 435 is extant. Two other Chinese translations appear 
to date from 513 and 700-704. One of the Tibetan translations is in 
fact a translation from Gunabhadra's Chinese version. Suzuki? 
compares these several translations. 

Jikido Takasaki has also studied the likely origins of this work. 
He writes that "the Siitra consists of two parts, one in mixed prose 
and verse and forming the main body of the Sitra, and the other, 
a section exclusively in verse which was named Sagathakam by 
Nanjio, the editor of the Sanskrit text...Development (of the two 
parts) took place in both independently until finally they were 
combined into one volume...The original form of the Lankavatara 
was in verses akin to the Sagathakam."** As a leading scholar on 
the theory of tathagatagarbha in Buddhism, and noting the 
references to it in this text, perhaps the earliest such references to 
be found, Takasaki is naturally interested in the relative chronology 
of this work and the Ratnagotravibhaga, the basic text for 
tathdgatagarbha theory. He writes: "Both the LV and the RGB share 
the Tathagatagarbha theory, especially that of the Srimaladevi- 
(sutra), and both are proximate to the Yogacara, but do not belong 
to the orthodox Vijfianavada. Nevertheless they do not show any 
awareness of each other's existence, or at least we can say that the 
latter did not use the former as an authority. This would not mean 
that the RGB is of an earlier date than the LV, or vice versa, but 
rather it would show the distance between them both being on the 
peripheries of the Yogacara but at opposite poles from each other. 
Due to their peculiar situation with regards to the Yogacara, 
Vasubandhu never referred to either text even though he was 
acquainted with both of them to some extent. It was only after 
Vasubandhu, probably by the end of the fifth century, that both 
texts come to be ‘enrolled’ among the works of the Yogacara as 
authorities of a sort, and this fact is shown by their having been 
translated by the team of Bodhiruci and Ratnamati around 510 
along with other works of the Vijiianavada.""° 

In any case it is evident that a number of the typical technical 
terms of Yogacara surface in the Lankd@vatara, but that, depite a 
sizable literature on this text, its position among the schools of 
Buddhist thought is still somewhat unclear. 

"E" references are to the edition in Vaidya®”’. "T" references are 


334 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


to D.T. Suzuki's translation®”’. Numbering of sections within 
chapters correspond to those in T. Various sections are translated 
by Edward Hamlin®”, indicated by "H". Some passages are also 
translated in D.T. Suzuki®”’, referred to as "S". 


CHAPTER ONE 


(E1-9; T3-21; $120-121)°” "The Lanka@vatara-stitra opens with 
a spectacle, a play of illusions which serves to introduce one of the 
central themes of the text: the doctrine of maya, the dream-like 
quality of the phenomenal world." This spectacle occurs in Lanka, 
i.e. modern Sri Lanka; thus the name of the work. 

There is a reference to the problem of time.*” 


CHAPTER TWO 


1-2.(E10-16; T23-31) The Bodhisattva Mahamati asks the Buddha 
one hundred and eight questions. 

3.(E16-17; T31-33) One hundred and one negative assertions. 

4.(E18; T33-35) Consciousness is classified in several ways.*”” 

5.(E18; T35) Seven kinds of essential nature: origin, existence, 
characteristic mark, great element, cause, condition and fulfillment. 

6.(E18; T18-19) Seven highest things (paramartha): the realms 
of awareness (cittagocara), of knowledge (jfidnagocara), of wisdom, 
of views, the world beyond views, the world beyond the earth, and 
the world of the path of a tathagata. 

The correct view is not to be confused with that of heretics 
(tirthakara) who do not understand that views concern the 
conceptual constructions that are (actually) one's own awareness 
(svacittavisayavikalpadrstyanavabodhana). 

7.(E19; T36-39; $96-98) Views of other systems about causation 
are here refuted: eternalists, nihilists, all who believe in the reality 
of cause and effect, of aggregates, elements and senses. But those 
who understand that awareness has nothing to do with causation, 
that differences are as in a dream, will soon appreciate the identity 
of nirvana and samsara and enter a state beyond mental awareness. 

9.(E20-23; T39-44; T171-174, 188-189)°”* Why does visual 





LANKAVATARA 335 


awareness occur? For four reasons: one's clinging to an external 
world, clinging to matter and traces bred by wrong views, the very 
nature of consciousness, and our wish for multiplicity. For these 
reasons the waves of consciousness stir on the abode-consciousness 
(dlayavijfiana). And this applies to all five kinds of sensory 
awareness together with mental awareness (manovijfiana). 

Now yogis think they can stop this functioning of awareness by 
entering trance states, but since the seeds of karma are still 
operative they do not escape. But the Bodhisattvas who understand 
that the world is mind-only succeed where they fail. 

11.(E23; T44-46) Three aspects of wisdom: freedom from 
appearances, when one has mastered the vehicles of disciples, the 
self-enlightened, and followers of other schools; the particular 
abilities obtained by Buddhas through their vows; and the stage of 
dharmakaya obtained by wisdom, by which is attained the status of 
tathagata. 

12.(E23-24; T46-49) The twin errors of asserting or denying that 
a rabbit has horns. Some philosophers believe that form (ripa) is 
different from space (akaga). But they are the same thing.°” 

13.(E24; T49; S175) Five verses, the middle one of which relates 
to extension.*° 

14.(E25; T49-51; $208-208) Is purification of outflows 
instantaneous or gradual? It is both. 

15.(E25; T51-52; $320-321) The Buddha that flows out of 
dharmata and the Buddha who produces magical appearances 
distinguished. 

16-17.(E25-26; T52-55) Two aspects of the way of the disciple: 
self-realization and adherence to the notion of self-nature. The 
eternal-unthinkable (nitydcintya) that is wrongly taken to be a 
creator, since he would require a further creator, would not be 
eternal, would be only a verbal designation. By contrast our eternal- 
unthinkable is the highest reality, having nothing to do with being 
or nonbeing. 

18.(E27; T55) The storehouse-consciousness is liberation, and 
samsara as well. 

19.(E27; T55-56; S190-191) Nothing is born. 

_20.(E27; T56-58; $148) Five kinds of people with insight: those 
with disciples’ insight, those with the insight of the self-enlightened, 
those with the insight of a tathdgata, those of indeterminate lineage 


336 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and those of no lineage at all. The tathagata's insight is itself of 
three sorts: seeing that the nature of things is not a self-nature, 
attainment through realization, and attainment of insight into all 
the lands of Buddhas. Those who attain these heights lack fear. 

22.(E28-29; T58-59) There are two kinds of those who do not 
desire liberation (icchantika)--those completely without dharma 
through having abandoned the teaching, and those who have vowed 
to remain after all are liberated--a Bodhisattva. 

23.(E29; T59-60) Three kinds of essential nature: constructed 
(parikalpita), dependent (paratantra), and perfected (parinispanna). 
The first arises from attachment to names and to objects, the second 
from distinguishing loci and supporting objects. The third comes 
when one is free from signs, names, objects, marks and 
constructions. 

24.(E29; T60-62) Twofold egolessness (nairdtmya)--of persons, 
of the idea that there is "I" of a person--and of factors, the 
realization that the aggregates, elements and senses are the result 
of construction. 

25.(E30; T62-64) Asserting (samaropana) and refuting (apavada) 
are to be avoided. 

26.(E31; T64--65) Bodhisattvas assume different forms to assist 
others. 

27.(E31-33; T65-68; S287-291) Seven kinds of emptiness: of 
marks; of essential nature; of the impossibility of action since all the 
aggregates are empty; of the necessity of action since things go on 
as long as cause and karma operate; of the unspeakableness of all 
things, being empty; of the great emptiness of everything from the 
standpoint of highest knowledge; and the emptiness of the notion 
of mutual absence. The last is the least profound. 

Explanations of non-birth and nonduality. 

28.(E33; T68-70; $138-139) Objection: Is not the 
tathagatagarbha another name for a self? 

Answer: No, for it is taught that tathagatagarbha is emptiness, 
liberation; that theory is intended to show people that they should 
not cling to an ego. 

30.(E34; T70-72) Four things that make a Bodhisattva a great 
yogi: seeing that everything is only awareness; abandoning the idea 
that things are born, remain and disappear; realizing that there is 
no external world; and attainment of realization through wisdom. 





LANKAVATARA 337 


31.(E35-36; 172-75) Six causes: (1) becoming-cause 
(bhavisyahetu), (2) relation-cause (sambandhahetu), (3) mark-cause 
(laksanahetu), (4) causal cause (k@ranahetu), (5) manifesting cause 
(vyafijanahetu), (6) dependent cause (apeksahetu). But though 
these are here discriminated they neither occur together nor 
separately. 

32-34.(E36-37; T75-78) Four sorts of verbal constructions 
(vagvikalpa): those indicating distinguishing marks, those indicating 
dream-objects, those arising from depravity and construction, and 
those arising from beginningless constructions, i.e., from karma. 

Mahamati: Are words the same as or different from conceptual 
constructions? 

Answer: Neither. Language comes from constructions, so they 
cannot be the same, but if they are different they cannot have the 
meaning they do have. 

Mahamati: Is language real or what expresses reality? 

Answer: Neither. Reality is a pleasurable state not gained by mere 
words, but rather by wisdom. And words are born and die and are 
conditioned; they are only indications, not reality. 

35.(E37-40; T78-84) The world is illusory, like a dream, or a 
painting, or water-bubbles, etc. There is no external reality; it is 
like reflections, like a mirage. 

36.(E40; T84-85) What the Buddha does not teach. 

37.(E40-41; T85-86; $367) Four kinds of meditative trance: that 
of the ignorant, that which analyzes meanings, that which has 
suchness (tathata) as its content, and the trance of the tathagatas. 

38.(E41; T86-87) Nirvana explained. When all three types of 
consciousness--the storehouse-consciousness, the mind and the 
mental consciousness--undergo a revolution (paravrtti), that is 
liberation. 

39.(E42; T87) Two kinds of attachment--to words and to objects 
as having an essential nature. 

40.(E42-43; T87-90; S203-205) Two kinds of power (adhisthita) 
possessed by noble and fully enlightened beings. One is that by 
which they undergo extensive concentration and trance; the other 
is that by which they are favored with a visitation by the Buddhas 
themselves. Without these powers they would backslide. 

41.(E43; T90-91) Clearing up of confusion about dependent 
origination. 


338 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


42.(E43-44; T91-92) Since there are words without things, words 
are unreal, and existence does not depend on words. 

43.(E44-45; T92-95) The wise are still subject to the appearance 
of error (bhranti), but they know it as error. The ignorant are taken 
in by it. Indeed, there are three kinds of wise people: the disciples, 
who preserve the notions of particular and general; the liberated for 
themselves, who retire from society; and the Buddhas, who know 
that there is nothing but awareness. 

Mahamati: Does error occur or not? 

Answer: It is like maya; it has no characteristic mark. 

Mahamati: If so, maya will be the cause of further errors, etc. 

Answer: No, maya causes no error; it has no such capacity. 

44.(E45-46; T95-96) It is not that maya doesn't exist. Everything 
is maya, being unreal and disappearing immediately upon occurring, 
but being classified as particular or general depending on how it is 
classified. 

45.(E46; T96-97) Mahamati: The Buddha says both that 
everything is unborn and that it all resembles maya. This is a 
contradiction. 

Answer: When one recognizes that the world is merely mind one 
will recognize that all is unborn. Still, I teach differently to different 
pupils depending on their needs. 

46.(E46-47; T97-98) The name-body (namakaya) is the object or 
substance that constitutes the letter of the alphabet involved; the 
term-body (padakaya) completes the context of reference; the 
syllable-body (vyafijanakaya) is the verbal entity which is short or 
long. 
47.(E47; T98-99) On the inexplicables (avyakrta), such as: 

48.(E47-48; T99-100; S304) Everything is without essential 
nature, unborn, without death, not eternal, not noneternal. 

49.(E48-50; 1100-105) Stream-enterers, once-returners, 
nonreturners and perfected beings distinguished. 

50.(E50; T105-106) Two kinds of discriminatory awareness 
(buddhi)--the one that considers the inexplicables, etc. as 
inapplicable, and the one which distinguishes objects and breeds 
attachment. 

51.(E50-51; T106-107; $368) Both the great elements and the 
substances derived from them are unreal, are only mind. 

52.(E51; T107-108) On the five aggregates. 


LANKAVATARA 339 


53.(E51-52; T108-110; $192-193) Four kinds of liberation: when 
essential natures are seen as nonexistent, when things are realized 
to be without characteristic marks, when things are seen to be 
without specific characteristics, when attachment to distinguishing 
particular and general characteristics is ended. On my view, 
liberation occurs when mental consciousness (manovijfidna) ceases. 

Mahamati; But there are eight consciousnesses, of which mental 
consciousness is only one. 

Answer: The other seven arise when mental consciousness 
operates. 

54.(E52-53; T110-112) When one can tell constructed things 
from others one will be able to terminate conceptual constructions. 
There are twelve sorts of constructions: constructions of (1) 
repeated words, attachment to nice sounds, (2) denotations, 
supposing there are distinct verbal entities corresponding to the 
things they name, (3) characteristic marks, classification into 
categories, (4) things, such as gold, etc. that are found desirable, 
(S) essential nature, classification according to philosophical system, 
(6) cause, (7) views, such as nihilistic, etc.; (8) reasoning (yukti), 
(9) origination, (10) nonorigination, (11) relation, (12) bondage 
and nonbondage, supposing there is something bound as if it were 
tied up. 

55.(E53-54; T112-114; $160-162) Awareness involves relation to 
contents. In nonappearance (nirabhasa) wisdom operates. 
Constructed things occur, but as dependent they do not; due to 
error constructed things appear, but construction does not (actually) 
occur. The appearance of different things is a mistake, causing 
bondage. What is constructed is just dependent, the appearance of 
many constructed. Construction belongs to the conventional 
(samvrti) realm, and when it is cut the wise find highest truth 
(paramartha). What is constructed cannot be perfected (nispanna) 

56.(E54-55; T114-117; $360-361) The one-vehicle (ekayana) way 
involves the non-operation of conceptual constructions such as 
grasper and grasped, constructed and true, etc., and has only been 
practised by the Buddha himself. The triple-vehicle (triyana) way 
is intended for disciples and self-enlightened who have not yet 
destroyed karmic traces and whose knowledge is hidden, who 
cannot understand the selflessness of things; when, destroying bad 
karmic traces, they realize the selflessness of factors, they will not 


340 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


be full of arrogance over their concentration; going to the higher 
world of pure elements they will obtain the inconceivable 
dharmakaya. 


CHAPTER THREE 


57.(E56; T118-119) Three kinds of mind-body (manomayakaya): 
(1) that gained in the third to fifth stages of meditation by the 
attainment of the satisfaction when one realizes that there is no 
external world; (2) that gained in the eighth stage through 
experiencing the essential nature of dharma, when one gains in 
meditation an unusual body capable like that in dream of 
remarkable accomplishments; (3) that gained in keeping with one's 
group by one who understands fully all the teachings of the Buddha. 

58.(E56-57; T120-121; $363-364) The five producers of early 
retribution: murdering one's mother, murdering one's father, 
murdering a noble person, breaking up the Order, causing a 
Buddha's body to bleed. One committing any of these goes to Avici 
hell. This is the external meaning. There is also a hidden meaning 
of each of the five: on that understanding (viz., the mother of all 
beings is desire, the father ignorance, the noble person is the subtle 
passions, the "Order" is the aggregates, the destruction of the eight 
bodies of consciousness is the bleeding of the Buddha's body) to 
experience these five is to gain full understanding. 

60.(E57-58; T122-123; $351-352) Explanation of the Buddha's 
former births. 

61.(E58-59; T123-125; $275) The Buddha said that silence is the 
Buddha's speech. What does he mean by that? That one's own 
dharmatd is beyond language, and it is established forever as truth, 
suchness, reality.*** 

62.(E59-60; T125-127) The faults of nihilism and eternalism. 

63.(E60-61; T127-129; $350) Two features of the realization that 
provides liberation: that the realization itself is beyond language, it 
is an inner experience; but that the teaching about it fends off 
dualistic thoughts which otherwise block realization. 

64.(E61-63; T129-133; $241-243) Construction of what was not 
(abhitaparikalpa) explained. It involves the conceptual construction 
of things, distinctions among them, appropriating them and 
becoming attached to them. 


LANKAVATARA 341 


Mahamati: But isn't it attachment also when one conceives 
highest reality as distinct from what it is not, thus breeding 
conceptual constructions, etc.? 

Answer: Conceptual constructions are not actually bred, nor are 
they actually gotten rid of. They are not real, since everything is 
consciousness-only (cittamatra). | talk as if it were real only in order 
to begin instruction. 

65.(E63-64; T133-135) Question: The Buddha says that one 
should not grasp things according to language. But what is 
language? Why shouldn't one grasp its meaning? 

Answer: Words and meanings are neither the same nor different 
from each other. But the fault is to become attached to them and 
develop views. 

66.(E64-65; T135-137) On the differences between knowledge 
(jfiana) and mere awareness (vijfiana). There are three kinds of 
knowledge: worldly (laukika), other-worldly (lokottara) and beyond 
other-worldly (lokottaratama). Mere awareness is born and ends. 
Knowledge is without birth or death.” Worldly knowledge belongs 
to philosophers (tirthika) and ordinary folks, other-worldly 
knowledge to disciples and those self-enlightened, and knowledge 
beyond other-worldly to Bodhisattvas. Knowledge is free from 
attachment; mere awareness concerns manifold contents. Awareness 
is the product of three features; knowledge is not; it is unattainable, 
the inner state of realization. 

67.(E65; 1137-138) Nine kinds of transformation: of 
configuration, of characteristic mark, of cause, of reasoning, of view, 
of arising, of being, of the manifestation of conditions, of the 
manifestation of action. (Only the first is explained here.) 

68.(E65-66; T138-141) The variety of attachments. 

69.(E66-67; T141-143) Mahamati: You say that what is 
constructed cannot be real, yet both the wise and the ignorant 
continue to construct; it is only that what is constructed by the 
ignorant isn't real, while that constructed by the wise is. Thus in 
order to avoid the extremes of nihilism and eternalism you advise 
us to maintain realism, whereas since realism breeds clinging 
shouldn't you be teaching the doctrine of separateness 
(viviktadharma)? 

Answer: I do not deny separateness, nor do I teach realism as a 
final truth, though each may be taught where appropriate. 


342 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


70.(E67-69; 1144-146) Furthermore I don't preach that 
everything is unborn as a thesis, for to do so would be paradoxical, 
since what I preach is born. Likewise with "everything is empty" or 
"everything is without an independent nature". There is no 
independent nature, no construction, no actual entities, no store- 
consciousness. But these denials are not made in some higher arena 
of truth; all this is like mirages in the air. 

71.(E69-70; T146-148) Mahamati: So, you are saying that 
whatever one says about things is mere manifestation 
(vijfiaptimatra), that knowledge is unobtainable. But why is 
knowledge unobtainable? If a piece of awareness is unobtainable it 
is called a case of ignorance, not knowledge. 

Answer: We know that awareness can arise without any 
supporting object. We see that thinking about things is mere 
manifestation. To see that knowledge is unobtainable is to see that 
what is seen is only mind, that no objects of the sort seen exist. But 
logicians (tarkika) cannot understand this; they speak of 
consciousness-only but cannot really understand it. 

72.(E70; T148-149) One gains understanding either by study of 
texts or by turning away from constructing what is seen by one's 
own consciousness. 

73.(E70-74; T149-157) Mahamati: The materialist (lokayatika), 
who is very skilled and knowledgeable in speaking, can provide, we 
are told, advice only about worldly things, not dharma. Why is that? 

Answer: He does not understand dharma, confusing himself and 
others by the multitude of views and arguments he is master of. 

Mahamati: But doesn't the Buddha himself teach materialism? 

Answer: No, I teach the unborn. Nothing exists externally, there 
is nothing to be attached to. 

Stories about materialists are told. 

74.(E74-76; T157-161; S74-76) Various alternative theories about 
liberation are reviewed. But all of them view liberation in a causal 
way--something arises, something disappears. But actually nothing 
arises, nothing disappears. Nirvana is just the realization that there 
is nothing but consciousness. 

75.(E76-77; T161-164; $134) The tathdgata--or noble, fully- 
enlightened being--is neither made nor nonmade, neither effect nor 
cause; he is outside worldly usage. When I say all things are without 
a self, I mean that each and every factor is to be understood in its 





, 


¥ 


paeinbietiemot == 


LANKAVATARA 343 


own nature and not that of another. A cow's nature is not a horse's 
nature. That is what is meant by saying all things are empty. 
Everything is completely different from every other thing. 

76.(E77-80; 1164-169; $137, 347-348) The unborn, the 
tathagata, goes by many names. People do not realize this, and 
think there are many different beings corresponding to those various 
names. One should not be tied to the letters of the words; truths are 
not dependent on letters or words, though without the words how 
would the truth be taught? So one should conform to the meaning, 
not the letter of the word. 

77-78.(E80-83; T170-176; S$353-354) Mahamati: Your theory is 
really not different from other (Buddhist) philosophical theories. 
You all assume causation; you affirm unborn things--e.g., space, 
uncalculated cessation, liberation. 

Answer: No, my no-self and no-cessation theories are unlike 
others who speak that way. They view no-self and no-cessation as 
the very nature of things. I do not say that objects are not existent 
essentially, nor do I say they are existent essentially. And it is this 
no-birth and no-cessation that I call nirvana. 

Verses set forth these ideas further. 

79.(E83-85; T176-181) Eight theories about noneternality: (1) 
things are born and die; (2) things change in shape; (3) matter 
itself comes to an end; (4) things change their form--milk goes sour, 
etc.; (5) there is something called "noneternality"; (6) the presence 
and absence of things is noneternality; (7) noneternality is 
nonarising. Noneternality actually means that things are naturally 
destructible and nonexperiencable. But noneternality is not to be 
taken as an entity that brings about the destruction of things. Views 
(1) - (7) are refuted. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


80.(E86-89; T182-16; $292-299, 220-221) Mahamati: What is 
cessation (nirodha) and how can it be gained? 

Answer: In the sixth stage Bodhisattvas, as well as disciples and 
those self-enlightened, achieve the cessation trance. In the seventh 
stage the Bodhisattvas, but not the other two, attain permanent 
cessation. At the eighth stage all three stop entertaining any 
thoughts arising from awareness, mind and mental awareness. All 


344 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


three attain nirvana, but a Bodhisattva does not enter into it out of 
choice. However, the disciples and self-enlightened are so caught up 
in what they have achieved that they are unable to abandon all 
views; they merely have the view of liberation and do not attain 
parinirvana. The Bodhisattvas, though, while having achieved 
liberation, are not extinguished. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


81.(E88-89; T187-189) The liberated, the tathdgata, is neither 
eternal nor noneternal, for a number of reasons. 


CHAPTER SIX 


82.(E90-91; T190-193; $193-195) Mahamati: Please explain how 
aggregates, elements and senses come to be and cease? 

Answer: The tathdgatagarbha or storehouse-consciousness 
comprises the cause of both good and bad, and everything comes 
from it. It is without a self and therefore it is not a cause; it is the 
karmic influences which produce the other seven consciousnesses, 
which in turn produce ignorance. 

This was made clear to me in the 105.Srimalddevisiitra, a text 
meant for advanced thinkers rather than disciples, self-enlightened, 
and other philosophers. 

83-84.(E91-93; T193-198) Mahamati: Which are the five factors, 
the three essential natures, the consciousnesses and the twofold 
selflessness? 

Answer: The five factors*’ are name, sign, conceptual 
construction, knowledge, and suchness. A tathagata alone 
understands them and the other matters you asked about. He sees 
that the ignorant are confined to names and signs or appearances, 
whereas by conceptual construction, knowledge and suchness one 
overcomes that confinement to distinctions and gains the 
Bodhisattva stage of joy. From there he enters the higher-worldly 
path and eventually reaches the cloud of dharma (dharmamegha), 
from whence he reaches the stage of the thus-gone and achieves 
final liberation. 

The three essential natures, eight consciousnesses and two 





LANKAVATARA 345 


selflessnesses are all included within the five factors. Of those five, 
the first two--name and sign--are included in the constructed realm, 
relating to the idea of a self; construction is included in the 
dependent realm, relating to the manyness of objects; knowledge 
and suchness are included in the perfected realm, relating to the 
indestructible, viz., perfection. 

85.(E93-95; T198-202; S$149-153) Mahamati: The Buddha says 
that tathagatas are like the sands on the river Ganges. Is this to be 
taken literally? 

Answer: No. This is an extended metaphor. Those sands are like 
the tathagatas in being free from constructions, never destroyed, of 
immeasurable number, nontransmigrating, without a body, 
unconcermed. 

86.(E95-96; T202-204; $198-199) Everything is momentary, even 
the tathagatagarbha, except for the pure proclivities, gold, light, the 
relics of the Buddha and enlightenment. 

87.(E96; T204-205) The six perfections are of three kinds: 
worldly, other-worldly, and above other-worldly. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


89.(E98-99; T207-210) A number of questions posed by 
Mahamati and answered: 

Why were disciples assured by the Buddha of their eventual 
enlightenment? So that they would seek Bodhisattvahood. It is 
nevertheless true that all three kinds of noble ones overcome the 
obstructions of the defilements, but only when selflessness is 
understood by a Bodhisattva do the obstructions of awareness cease. 

How can one become a tathdgata without achieving parinirvana? 
Since he does not deliberate or contemplate he has no more karma, 
is thus free from death, is beyond defilements and awareness. 

Other questions of a similar sort are answered. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 


(E200-205; T211-222) Why the Bodhisattva in particular, and the 
rest of men in general, should not eat meat. 


346 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
CHAPTER NINE 


(E206; T223-225) Recitations which will guard one against 
tnisfortune. 


SAGATHAKAM 
(E108-165; T226-295) This section consists of 884 verses of 
which 208 are repetitions of verses found in the verse Chapters 
above. T indicates which these 208 verses are.** 
139. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Nirayasiitra**° 
140. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Ekottaragamasitra*’”, 
141. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Bodhisattvapiirvasiitra®®* 
142. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Buddhapitakaduhsilanirgrahasitra*®? 
143. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Candragarbhasiitra*” 
144. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Dharani(svara)rajasutra 
145. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Gayasirsasiitra*”’ 
146. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, KuSalamiilasamparigrhasiitra®”” 
147. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Mahamayiri(vidyarajni)sitra®” 
148. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Maitreyavyakaranasitra™ 


149. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Purnapariprechasutra or 
Bodhisattvapitakastitra®” 


150. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Sariputrapariprechastitra’”° 
151. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, SaddharmapravrttinirdeSasiitra” 


152. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Sumukha(dharani)sitra®* 


153. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Updlipariprechasiitra’”? 


154. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Vikurvanardajapariprechasiitra*® 


155. NAGARJUNA, Dasabhimikavibhasasastra*”' 


Hajime Nakamura writes: "This work is especially important 
because of a passage in which the way of Easy Practice by Faith is 
set forth. In this work the belief in Amitabha is set forth as the Easy 
Practice. If the aspirant, having heard the Name of Amitabha, thinks 
on Him and utters the Name with a faithful mind, he will attain the 
stage of Non-retrogression (avinivartaniya) toward perfect 
Enlightenment very quickly. Because of this idea, this work came to 
be highly esteemed by later Pure Land Buddhists in China and 
Japan.“ 

This text often quotes the 41.Bodhisambharasutra. 


156. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Prajfiaparamitahrdayastitra*” 

There are two versions of this, the "Heart" Siitra--one shorter, one 
longer. The shorter is presumably earlier, translated into Chinese 
by Kumarajiva around 400. This brief sutra, together with 
157.Vajracchedika, are perhaps the most popular siitras in 
Mahayana Buddhism as it finds its way into China and Japan. Since 
the siitra is short, we provide in its entirety Edward Conze's 
translation.“ 


Translation by Edward Conze 


"Homage to the Perfection of Wisdom, the Lovely, the Holy. 
Avalokita, the Holy Lord and Bodhisattva, was moving in the deep 
course of the wisdom which has gone beyond. He looked down 
from on high, he beheld but five heaps, and he saw that in their 
own-being they were empty. 

Here, O Sariputra, form is emptiness, and the very emptiness is 
form, emptiness does not differ from form, nor does form differ 
from emptiness; whatever is form, that is emptiness, whatever is 
emptiness, that is form. The same is true of feelings, perceptions, 
impulses and consciousness. 


348 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Here, O Sariputra, all dharmas are marked with emptiness, there 
is neither form, nor feeling, nor perception, nor impulse, nor 
consciousness, no eye, or ear, or nose, or tongue, or body, or mind, 
no form nor sound, nor smell, nor taste, nor touchable, nor object 
of mind, no sight organ element, etc. until we come to no mind- 
consciousness element; there is no ignorance, no extinction of 
ignorance, etc., until we come to there is no decay and death, nor 
extinction of decay and death; there is no suffering, no origination, 
nor stopping, nor path; there is no cognition, no attainment and no 
nonattainment. 

Therefore, O Sariputra, owing to a Bodhisattva's indifference to 
any kind of personal attainment, and through his having relied on 
the perfection of wisdom, he dwells without thought-coverings. In 
the absence of thought-coverings he has not been made to tremble, 
he has overcome what can upset, in the end sustained by Nirvana. 

All those Buddhas who appear in the three periods of time, 
through having relied on the perfection of wisdom they fully awake 
to the utmost, right and perfect enlightenment. 

Therefore one should know the Prajfiaparamita as the great spell, 
the spell of great knowledge, the utmost spell, the inequalled spell, 
allayer of all suffering, in truth--for what could go wrong? By the 
Prajiiaparamita has this spell been delivered. It runs like this: 
‘Gone, gone, gone beyond, gone altogether beyond, O what an 
awakening, all hail!" 


157. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Vajracchedikaprajfiaparamitasiitra’® 


Edward Conze*® sums up "the message of the Siitra under five 

headings: 

"I. One should not perceive a ‘self, a being, a living soul, or 
a person. 

Il. One should not perceive a dharma, or separate entity, 
anywhere, because there is none. 

Ill. Everything is not itself. 

IV. One should not establish one's thoughts anywhere. 

Vv. The Buddha and his enlightenment are strictly 
transcendental." 


349 
158. SRILATA 


We know of this Buddhist scholar from references to him by 
Vasubandhu in the Abhidharmakosabhasya. Prabal Kumar Sen*”” has 
studied seven references to Srilata in that work which range over 
various matters of Abhidharma theory, agreeing with Poussin and 
A.K. Bhattacharya (also with Warder) that Srilata was in all 
likelihood a Sautrantika. See also the comments on 72.Kumaralata 
above, where it was suggested that Srilata may have been 
Kumaralata's pupil. 

According to Jean Przyluski, following H. Liiders, Srilata wrote a 
work titled Sautrantika-Vibhasa.*® 


159. VASUBHADRA, Caturagamavibhaga or Tridharmaskandha 


We know nothing about this author, but since his work was 
translated in 381 we can suppose the work existed by about 350. 
The following summary is based on Eric Grinstead's unpublished 
manuscript.*° 


PART ONE: On Dharma 


(1-28). We here preach the triple dharma, consisting of 
merit, bad things and bases. One gets liberation by awareness of 
these three. Such liberation is sought by all who seek liberation, 
even insects. 

Question: How can awareness of merit, bad things and bases 
bring liberation? You don't get well just by looking at the medicine! 

Answer: But light destroys darkness directly. Knowledge and 
realization are the same thing. 

Question: What is the good of talking of "knowledge" and 
"realization"? Language involves rebirths and sense-experiences. 

Answer: If one has some virtue there are three kinds of good 
identification--(1) merit, (2) faculties and (3) virtue. Merit is giving, 
morality and discrimination. Giving consists of preaching the 
dharma, fearlessness in preferring the eight kinds of good conduct 
and the three refuges, and gifts. Morality is meritorious 
manifestation in body and speech. Discrimination is correct 
meditative practice, boundless and immaterial, involving meditation 


350 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


on the abandonment of desire, differentiation, satisfaction and 
frustration. It is boundiess, involving loving kindness, compassion, 
sympathy and equanimity, and it involves the four immaterial states 
of the infinity of emptiness, of knowledge, of nothingness and of 
neither-identification-nor-nonidentification. 

(29-65). Which are (2) the faculties? The "roots" of nonenvy, 
nonhatred, nondelusion. These are not the same as the roots of 
merit; they are supervenient on those roots--e.g., nonenvy is 
supervenient on giving, nonhatred on morality, nondelusion on 
discrimination. This supervenience is applied to the other two good 
identifications of the previous section. 

Patience, learning and penetration breed certainty (niskarmksa) 
in the conventional world, as in the realm of sexual passion. 
"Learning" means the siitras, the Abhidharma and the Vinaya 
pitakas. It is ridding oneself of all envy, hatred and delusion. Each 
of these three baskets has its own purpose--the stitras to preach, the 
Abhidharma to explain, the Vinaya to counsel action. The limbs of 
the enlightenment one gets by learning involve good friends, 
thinking and acquisition. Learning is assisted by teachers, disciples 
and others in the assembly who possess compassion. It involves 
mindfulness of breathing, energy and restraint. Acquisition involves 
comprehension, method and result. 

Comprehension is tantamount to liberation, and involves the 
higher life, cutting the roots, and adjacence to meditation. The 
higher life is achieved by taking the five vows, meditation and 
practising monkhood. These are explained, along with various 
requirements as to food, dress and behavior. 

Cutting the roots requires meditation, patience and conceptual 
identification. It is the borderline concentration leading to release. 

(65-90). The spiritual method consists of (1) morality, (2) 
resolution and (3) knowledge. There are two kinds of (1) morality, 
the everyday kind and the superior kind, which involves right 
speech, virtuous action and a beneficial type of rebirth as a devout 
layman or a monk. (2) Resolution involves energy, mindfulness and 
concentration. Energy is faith, renunciation and serenity; they lead 
to good actions. These are explained with examples. Mindfulness 
involves bodily, sensory and mental attentiveness. Concentration is 
emptiness, dispositionlessness and nonidentifyingness. "Emptiness" 
means "without any concept of self or anything belonging to self." 


CATURAGAMAVIBHAGA 351 


"Dispositionless" is to be without action, thus not wishing to be 
present at any time. "Nonidentifyingness" is to be without concepts; 
another term for it is "abandonment". Knowledge is initial and 
sustained awareness of all the first three stages, involving views, 
spiritual practice and the adept. It comprises knowledge of dharma, 
investigative knowledge, and the knowledge that one knows, which 
proceed in that order. 

(91-103). Discriminative knowledge is of three kinds: (1) of 
characteristic marks, (2) of conditioning factors, and (3) of seeds. 
(1) The knowledge of the defining features of things is passing and 
subject to destruction. (2) Conditioning factors are noneternal, 
frustrating, involving the notion of self. (3) These seeds are the 
seeds of sensations, disaster and nonattachment. 

The knowledge of a realized one is also of three kinds: (1) 
penetration, (2) knowledge of higher faculties, (3) perspicuity. (1) 
Penetration comprises knowledge of previous births and deaths and 
of the destruction of contaminants. (2) Knowledge of higher 
faculties includes extraordinary travel in space and time, entering 
the awarenesses of others, and the divine ear. (T. 506 appears to 
have a different list.) (3) Perspicuity is understanding of dharma, 
meanings, of grammar and the connections of things. 

(104-128). In 29-65 above we analyzed acquisition as 
comprehension, method and result, but we haven't yet explained 
"result". The results are (1) a Buddha, (2) one self-enlightened, (3) 
the disciple. A Buddha "has no more" (asesa), the self-enlightened 
is not dependent on others for enlightenment, the disciple is 
dependent on others for enlightenment. 

Getting rid of bondage involves faith, resolve, conviction of right 
view, and internalized insight. When bondage is not gotten rid of 
the state is called "the eighth" or "stream-enterer", involving belief, 
insight and knowledge of dharma. Such a one has only seven more 
rebirths to go in good families or other worlds. 

The perfected being may have dull, sharp or middling faculties, 
which are explained. Liberation is from desire, from unpleasantness, 
and clean. Or, it is of two kinds: by mindfulness and by knowledge. 
When final liberation or cessation occurs all awarenesses and 
accompanying mental factors are extinguished. 


352 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
PART TWO: Bad Things 


(129-186). Actions involving frustration, desire and ignorance are 
bad. They are of bodily, vocal and mental varieties. Bodily bad 
actions include murder, stealing and treating others badly, whether 
by explicit intent, collusion or overt behavior. Bad vocal actions 
include lying, duplicity and frivolous speech. Bad mental actions 
involve desire, hatred and wrong views. One who is without wrong 
views means being without opinions concerning actions, results and 
human affairs generally. 

What is desire? It is sensual attachment, anger, and pride. 
Attachments are to things desired, to existence, to the religious life. 
Anger (or repugnance) can be against oneself, one's family, one's 
enemy. Pride can be of oneself as better than, equivalent to or 
inferior to others. 

How about ignorance? It is lack of knowledge, false opinion and 
doubt. Lack of knowledge can be internally or externally 
conditioned, unconditioned (at liberation) or indeterminate, i.e., 
without awareness of feeling of the past or of liberation. False 
opinions include the view that the self is real, extreme views, and 
adherence to particular views. Doubts include uncertainty about the 
three jewels (the Buddha, the dharma, the order), about the truth, 
and about concentration. 


PART THREE: On the Bases (dsraya) 


(186-260). The bases are the aggregates, elements and senses. An 
aggregate is known as matter, conditions, awareness. A single 
material aggregate is a bundle of factors into material form--the four 
great elements and their sensations. Conditions are bodily, vocal and 
mental, and include feelings, identifications and consciousness. 
Feelings are satisfying, frustrating, neither--their supports and 
sources are identified. All feelings derive from action (karma), either 
one's own or that of others or both, and are determined by the time, 
disadvantageous occurrences (wind, bile, phlegm) and/or natural 
disasters. 

There is an interesting but obscure discussion here of 
identifications. 

What about elements? There are three realms of elements--the 


CATURAGAMAVIBHAGA 353 


realm of sensual pleasure, the material and the immaterial realms. 
The realm of sensual pleasure involves birth as a god or a human 
being, or in a lower birth. Humans occupy four countries-- 
Jambudvipa, Videha, Godaniya and Uttarakuru. The gods occupy 
several heavens involving or not involving sexual activity, 
conversation, visual contact, etc. Lower births include hell, animal 
and ghostly existences, and are characterized as cold or hot (many 
examples given) or in between, explained as existing alone in caves 
and marshes. Animals and ghostly existences are classified and 
characterized. 

The material realm comprises the part involving contentedness, 
that involving the absence of satisfaction, and that of equanimity. 
The second meditative trance state occurs in this material realm and 
involves mindfulness and contentedness; it results in rebirth as a 
teacher, a good body, or as part of a worthy group. 

The immaterial realm involving absence of satisfaction arises in 
the higher trances, involves limited purity, unlimited purity or 
universal purity, and, when one's mindfulness is gone, leads to 
rebirth in various heavens. Restraint results in even higher rebirths 
as gods, nonidentifying beings and in pure abodes. 

What about the senses? They are essentially those of the disciple, 
the adept and the liberated one. They are described in standard 
manner. 


160. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Sammitiyanikayasastra 
Summary by Robert Buswell, Jr. 


The Sammitiyanikayasastra provides a synopsis of some of the 
major doctrines of the Sammitiya school, a subsect of the 
Vatsiyaputriyas, who are well known for their view that the person 
(pudgala) in some sense exists--the worst of heresies for the other 
Buddhists who rejected any conception of egoism. Little is known 
about the school from Sanskrit sources apart from indirect 
references in the polemical attacks of rival Buddhist sects. The only 
extant treatise by the Sammitiyas themselves is the Chinese 
translation of *Sammitiyanikayasastra, which gives an extensive 
defense of the pudgalavada of the school, responding to challenges 


354 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


to that doctrine and providing a variety of proofs to support it.*!° 
The discussion on the person is in the context of a treatment of the 
process of rebirth, which also provides important information on the 
Sammitiya theory of an intermediate state between existences, 
which was accepted by other Buddhist schools as well, including the 
Sarvastivadins and the later Mahisasakas. 

No information is available as to the author, date of composition, 
or translator of the treatise. The text appears to be complete; 
K.Venkataramanan's suggestion that the treatise's reference to a 
"previous chapter" (ch'ien-chang) might have been an allusion to a 
lost chapter is clearly wrong; the reference is instead to the 
"preceding section of the extant texts’.“'! The Chinese translation 
is in three fascicles (chuan), an arbitrary division based on length, 
not content; for this summary, I have adopted instead a topical 
divison. The original title of the treatise, as given at the conclusion 
of the translation, was probably Asrayaprajfiaptinirdesa, which has 
more bearing on the actual content of the text, i-e., the view of the 
Sammitiyas that the individual was to be viewed as having 
conventional validity. As will be seen, the Sammitiyas did not claim 
that the self existed in reality--the heresy attributed to them by 
other Buddhist schools--but that the existence of a self in a 
conventional, nonultimate sense could not be denied. 

"BE" references are to the Chinese translation titled Sam-mi-ti pu 
lun, Taisho 1649.32.462a-473a, in three fascicles. The translator is 
unknown; the translation is included in the Chinese bibliographical 
catalogues among the anonymous translations from the period of 
the Western Chin dynasty (385-431 A.D.). "T" references are to K. 
Venkataramanan's translation (169.1.1).4? 


I. The Process of Rebirth (E462a.2-b.5; T165-166) 


The treatise opens with a discussion of the process of rebirth via 
the intermediate state. At the moment of death, the individual to be 
reborn assumes a neutral state of awareness that frees him from 
attachment to the present state of existence. The inertia of his 
compounded action then directs his awareness toward a state of 
existence consonant with the predominant orientation of his conduct 
(ie., as either skillful or unskillful). 

The author then clarifies that rebirth from one state of existence 


SAMMITIYANIKAYA 355 


to another, whether exclusively within the sensual realm or between 
the sensual and the material realms, requires that the person arise 
first in the intermediate state. In the case of the Buddhas and 
disciples, however, the individual can progress from one 
intermediate state to another, without the necessity of taking rebirth 
in one of the three realms of existence. For example, the stream- 
enterer may have all of his required seven rebirths within the 
intermediate state, until he finally attains final liberation. This topic 
will be taken up again in the final section of the text. 


II. Seven Theories about the Self (E462.6-466a.27; T166-182)*"* 


(The treatment of the process of rebirth leads into a discussion 
of the nature of the self or person who so transmigrates. Seven 
conflicting views given by various Buddhist teachers are then 
presented (462b.7-464a.22), to each of which the Sammitiyas later 
respond (464a.28-466a.27). To make the argument and rebuttal 
easier to follow, I combine these two subsections.) 

(1) In reality there is no self; there are only the aggregates and 
senses. Various scriptural citations are given which uphold the 
position that there is no "I" or "mine". 

Sammitiya rebuttal: "Although there is a self, it is a conventional 
name. The self is not spoken of as being real. The self is dependent 
upon the aggregates, which are associated with the outflows." 
Similarly, the use of the words "I" and "mine" by the Buddha was 
also purely conventional and was not intended to convey any 
ultimate reality; thus the rejection of "I" and "mine" does not prove 
that there is no self. Finally, just because the Buddha did not say 
definitively that the self exists does not prove that the self does not 
exist. 

(2) It cannot be said that the self either exists or does not exist. 
This is because the characteristics of the self are also indescribable. 
This view is justified because, of the four types of answers to 
questions allowed by the Buddha, queries about the self were 
included in the fourth type--questions that were dismissed without 
giving any answer. Hence, the Buddha never stated definitively 
either that the self did or did not exist. In addition, if the self either 
did or did not exist, the relationship between the aggregates and the 
self should have been clear: i.e., the self should be either identical 


356 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


to, or different from, the aggregates. This relationship is, however, 
uncertain. Finally, the self cannot be called either eternal or 
impermanent and, consequently, its true nature cannot be said to be 
either existent or nonexistent. 

Sammitiya rebuttal: While "it cannot be said that the 
characteristics of the self are either permanent or impermanent, it 
can be said that the self does exist." The fact that questions about 
the self were dismissed does not prove that the self either does or 
does not exist, but merely that the question was wrongly framed. 
Similarly, while some advocates may be unclear about the 
relationship between the aggregates and the self, this does not prove 
that the self does not exist; it merely shows that those people have 
not realized the self. One who experiences the self should be able 
to explain definitively the relationship between the aggregates and 
the self. Finally, if the self were explicated in terms of its being 
either eternal or impermanent, this would result in the wrong views 
of either nihilism or eternalism, both of which the Buddha rejected. 
If it were said that the person does not exist in any way whatsoever, 
this would be the wrong view of nihilism. But the Sammitiyas say 
that the pudgala does exist (presumably from the standpoint of 
conventional usage, though this is not specified in the text), and this 
is right view. "This is because the self takes its stand between 
existence and nonexistence. Thus we now advocate that if there 
were no self whatsoever, the Buddha would not have said that ‘it 
takes its stand'. Since the Buddha did state that it 'takes its stand’, 
there consequently is an existent self that can be discussed." (This 
statement clarifies the basic Sammitiya position that advocating a 
role for the self in Buddhism is not itself a heresy: the belief in a self 
only becomes wrong view if either that self is clung to as being 
absolutely real, thus resulting in eternalism, or the inability to locate 
anything permanent in objects leads one to reject the self entirely, 
resulting in nihilism. The self does have a conventional validity," 
and is a valuable concept for explicating problematic areas of 
Buddhist doctrine, such as the relationship between action and its 
maturation, etc.). 

(3) The self exists in reality. This is proven because of the 
statements in the sutra that the individual is bound by the five 
aggregates, producing transmigration of the self. Furthermore, the 
admonition to cultivate the four foundations of mindfulness implies 


SAMMITIYANIKAYA 357 


that there actually is someone who should perform those 
contemplations. The Buddha also referred in several places to the 
person who burns his own body, or the person who attains 
contentment. Hence, the Buddha clearly states that there is a 
person, justifying the view that the self exists. 

Sammitiya rebuttal: There is no person who is actually bound, 
even though there is said to be bondage. The existence of a self 
based on the admonition to cultivate the four foundations of 
mindfulness is also rejected. "The Buddha told Katyayana that there 
was nothing else but awareness because he wanted to reveal that 
(the nature of) body, feeling, awareness and factors (the four 
foundations of mindfulness) was just awareness. He said that there 
was nothing else but awareness that became all factors." Hence, the 
reference to cultivation did not pertain to a self but to awareness. 
(This statement seems to be the precursor of much that became 
characteristic of later Vijiianavada thought.*) Finally, the 
statements in which the Buddha referred to a person were merely 
conventional, not definitive, statements. This is not, however, to say 
that the opposite view--that there is absolutely no self from any 
standpoint--is correct; for if that were the case, then there would be 
no murderer or victim, etc., and the law of moral action and 
retribution would become meaningless. This would lead inexorably 
to the rejection of causal relationships on a soteriological level as 
well: if there were no cause of samsara (the second noble truth) or 
its extinction (the third noble truth), the Buddhist path (the fourth 
noble truth) would also be meaningless. If the four noble truths 
(the essence of the dharma) were meaningless, then there would be 
no Buddha and consequently no Order. Thus the rejection of the 
pudgala leads to the rejection of the truth of Buddhism. Only if the 
pudgala and the Gtman are accepted does the Buddhist perspective 
remain viable.? 

(4) The five aggregates are what the pudgala or the atman is. 
This is justified because of scriptural passages in which the Buddha 





1.We see here once again that the acceptance of a self by the 
Sammitiyas was not meant to be an ontological statement, but was 
instead an expedient teaching that they considered essential if the 
doctrinal indefeasability of Buddhism was to be maintained. 


358 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


states that the six senses and the six types of sense-contact are the 
person, etc. 

Sammitiya rebuttal: Were the five aggregates the same as the 
self, then if the body were cut up there would then be many 
separate selves. By the same token, the life-force and the physical 
body would also have to be coterminous, so that if this body still 
existed (as it would for some time after death) the life-force also 
would continue, which is absurd. Hence, the proposal that the 
aggregates are identical with the self should be rejected.*® 

(5) The self is different from the five aggregates. This view is 
justified because of the famous sitra differentiating the burden (the 
five aggregates) from the bearer (the person). Other scriptures also 
describe the person as being the one who receives the fruition of 
past action; hence, while the aggregates perish in the transition 
from one life to the next, the person does not. Therefore the person 
is different from the aggregates. The Buddha also talked about his 
self, as when he said that in his previous birth he was named 
Mahadeva. Hence, while the Lord may have received a fresh set of 
aggregates in this present life, his self remains the same and is thus 
different from the aggregated. Finally, the Buddha placed the self 
among the neutral things, while he instead called the aggregates 
sometimes impermanent, sometimes permanent. For all these 
reasons, the self is different from the aggregates. 

Sammitiya rebuttal: The distinction between action and 
maturation, for example, proves instead that there is a continuity 
between the actions done in the present life and the maturation that 
takes place in a future life. The Buddha's references to his different 
lifetimes shows similarly that there has been a transition between 
his lives, not that those lives are separate and distinct. The final 
justification is also rejected, because, like the self, the aggregates too 
should not be described as either permanent or impermanent. The 
Sammitiyas continue on to show the absurdities created by this 
position. If the self were different from the body, the self should be 
able to move at will from one body to another, or take birth in 
completely different realms. If the self were so able to move freely, 
responsibility for action would be obviated and bondage and 
liberation would become meaningless. Therefore, this proposition 
is to be dismissed. 

(6) The self is eternal. This is because the self has no origin. The 


SAMMITIYANIKAYA 359 


Buddha specifically stated that an origin for the cycle of birth-and- 
death is indiscernible. But if something has no origin, it also cannot 
have an end, and thus the self must be eternal. A person is also able 
to remember his previous rebirths; thus, despite the fact that the 
aggregates perish from birth to birth, the pudgala does not. So the 
self is eternal. The Buddha has also explicitly stated that "he who 
crosses over to the other shore and abides in that land is called a 
brahmana." Hence, there is a person who is able to achieve 
liberation from samsdra and abide permanently in nirvana. 
Elsewhere, the Buddha also refers to one who reaches the 
imperturbable bliss of true liberation. Therefore, the self is a real 
thing that abides in various permanent states and thus must itself 
be eternal. 

Sammitiya rebuttal: To attempt to prove the eternality of the self 
because of its lack of origin would imply that samsara is also 
eternal, since it too has no origin. This cannot be accepted, 
presumably because it would then imply that liberation would be 
impossible. The proof on the basis of past lives is also inadequate, 
since the sequence of lives pertaining to an independent, eternal self 
would become as if permanent itself, and thus the round of birth- 
and-death would actually remain eternal, which is not necessarily 
true. Statements by the Buddha that there is a person who achieves 
or attains certain exalted states have nothing to do with the 
existence of a self; if that were the meaning of such remarks, it 
would actually imply that there was no achievement or attainment, 
since the self, being eternal, would be unchanging. 

(7) The self is impermanent. This is because the self has an 
origin, as in various siitras where the Buddha states that "a person 
takes birth"; and since something that has a beginning must also 
have an end, the self is impermanent. The Buddha also remarks that 
beings are born and then die, and something that thus changes is 
impermanent, unlike nirvana, which is eternal and therefore has no 
beginning or end. 

Sammitiya rebuttal: The continuity of moral cause and effect 
refutes this claim. If the self were impermanent, deeds previously 
performed would perish without bringing about their effect, and 
effects could take place without a previous cause. In this wise, the 
whole soteriology of Buddhism would be undermined. 

After completing his account of the seven wrong views of self, the 


360 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


author returns to consider the process by which a person is able to 
give up one life and take up another. Here the main premise of the 
Sammitiya school is given: "The person composed of the five 
aggregates is the real person. As the person composed of the five 
aggregates is the real person, it cannot be said that the pudgala is 
either permanent or impermanent." 


Ill. Three Conceptions of the Person (E466a.28-c.27; T182-184) 


A new section then begins, dealing with the three different 
explanations of the pudgala in Buddhism: (1) the person with 
reference to a locus (i-shuo-jen; *asrayaprajriaptapudgala), (2) the 
person with reference to transmigration (tu-shuo-jen; 
*sankramaprajnaptapudgala), and (3) the person with reference to 
extinction (mieh-shuo-jen; *nirodhaprajfiaptapudgala). (This 
threefold sense of the person is otherwise unknown in Buddhist 
texts, and is another unique contribution of this treatise.) 

(1) The person with reference to a locus. The siitra explains that 
asrayaprajfiapti refers to the fact that the names for things are 
derived from something else that serves as their point of reference, 
just as fire is spoken of with reference to fuel or ghee is spoken of 
with reference to milk. Similarly, that which is produced from the 
four material elements is called the self, because the person who 
depends upon material form for his existence is spoken about with 
reference to that form. This is not to say that the person is identical 
to or different from the aggregates, which would lead either to 
nihilism or eternalism, as mentioned previously; rather it means that 
the person and the five aggregates have a derivative existence, in 
which the presence of one perforce allows the presence of the other 
to be derived. 

(2) The person with reference to transmigration. Persons who 
cross from one state to another are said to transmigrate. This 
transition between states can thus refer to past, present, or future 
lifetimes. For example, where the Buddha says "In a past life, I was 
the highest of kings," he is referring to his person in a past 
"transmigration." 

(3) The person with reference to extinction. Every sense of the 
person that is not covered by the previous two types is covered by 
this last type. This involves such usages of the word "person" as 





SAMMITIYANIKAYA 361 


when the Buddha says "when that past body perishes," or "when 
aggregates of a bhiksu whose outflows are extinct will soon perish." 


IV.Issues Concerning Transmigration (E466c.28-469a.28; T185 195) 


Next, the interlocutor asks whether there is something remaining 
after the five aggregates perish, which is equivalent to asking what 
it is that leaves this existence to be reborn elsewhere. Three views 
are given as to what transmigrates: (1) the five aggregates, (2) the 
person, or (3) no person. The first view is rejected by the 
Sammitiyas on the grounds that if the aggregates were totally 
abandoned at the time of transmigration, there would be nothing 
remaining that would be able to move from this life to the next. "It 
is awareness that is pervaded by morality and concentration which 
relies upon these wholesome actions and takes rebirth in a higher 
plane." Therefore, at the time of transmigration, the five aggregates 
might perish, but something remains (apparently the awareness) 
and moves on to the next rebirth, depending on the direction of 
one's previous karma. Hence, the claim that it is the five aggregates 
which transmigrate should be rejected. If instead it were the person 
who transmigrates, this would imply that there exists a real entity 
which would have to be described either as eternal or mortal. But 
either way leads to wrong view, as discussed above, and denies the 
possibility of transmigration from one state to another. (This reply 
is apparently meant to cover the third view as well.) Hence, the 
pudgala is always associated with the aggregates, and cannot be 
said to exist in reality. 

Next, the process of origin in the intermediate state is taken up. 
When moving from one state of existence to another, the person 
must first pass through the intermediate state. Abandoning the five 
aggregates of his present existence, he concurrently takes up the five 
aggregates of the intermediate state and, simultaneous with the final 
moment of the present existence, there is the arising of the 
awareness of one's intermediate state. If this exchange did not take 
place simultaneously, it would lead to two fallacies: either one 
Person would have two existences (i.<., if the person first accepted 
the five aggregates of the intermediate state and then abandoned 
his present existence), or a gap would be present between lifetimes 
(i.e., if the aggregates of the present existence were abandoned 


362 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


before taking up the aggregates of the intermediate state). 

The treatise then begins a lengthy discussion on the question of 
whether there can be any beginning to the cycle of birth and death. 
The Sammitiya position is that regardless of whether there is or is 
not a beginning, it cannot be known. Various similes are given and 
scriptural passages cited in support of their view that no such 
beginning can be posited. 


V. The Nature of the Intermediate State (E469b.2-471c.3; T195-205) 


Ten objections to the existence of an intermediate state are 
raised, and then rebutted by the Sammitiyas. (These two sections 
are also combined for clarity's sake.) 

(1) There is no intermediate state because it is not mentioned as 
one of the five courses (viz., hell-beings, animals, ghosts, men, 
gods). 

Sammitiya rebuttal: The intermediate state is the vehicle that 
conveys the being from one course to another; it is not itself a 
course. It is as when it is said that one goes from one city to 
another, only the cities are mentioned, not the vehicle by which one 
is conveyed. Hence, just because the Buddha did not mention the 
intermediate state in the context of the courses does not prove that 
it does not exist. 

(2) The Buddha never predicted that anyone would be born in 
the intermediate state, as he did for the five courses. 

Sammitiya rebuttal: The intermediate state is not an abiding 
place; it is merely a place where the life-force, joy and frustration, 
and merit and demerit are transferred. Therefore it was not 
mentioned as a place where one would be born. 

(3) No actions were mentioned that led to the intermediate state, 
as was done for the five courses. 

Samitiya rebuttal: The intermediate state conveys the actions 
done in the previous life to the next life; it is not a place where new 
actions are performed. Therefore the Buddha did not mention any 
actions that led to the intermediate state. 

(4) The Buddha said definitively that there were five courses, but 
this was never said for the intermediate state. 

Sammitiya rebuttal: Just because the Buddha did not speak of an 
intermediate state does not mean that there isn't one, because the 





SAMMITIYANIKAYA 363 


Buddha himself has said that there are many things he knows that 
he chooses not to mention. 

(5) There is no intermediate state, because rebirth is 
instantaneous (dnantarya). 

Sammitiya rebuttal: This was said only to deny that there are 
other states of existence that intervene between one life and the 
next. This does not however deny an intermediate state, which is 
not a true state of existence, but simply a transitional stage. 

(6) If an intermediate state is posited between the previous life 
and the next, then there should also be another state intermediate 
between that intermediate state and the rebirth, and so on ad 
infinitum. 

Sammitiya rebuttal: Between the first and second meditational 
trances, the Buddha has also taught there is a single intermediate 
trance, not an infinite series of such intermediate states. So too 
should the intermediate state between existences be understood. 

(7) The intermediate state has no function, for it involves no 
duration of life, no action, and no sensation; therefore it should not 
be posited to exist. 

Sammitiya rebuttal: The function of the intermediate state is to 
convey the being from one life to the next; therefore it has a 
function. 

(8) If the intermediate state and rebirth are the same factor, then 
there would be no need to posit the separate existence of the 
intermediate state. But if they are different, then the intermediate 
state should be called a separate course. 

Sammitiya rebuttal: The process of rebirth involves arising in 
both of those states: after arising in the intermediate state, the being 
then proceeds to be reborn. Hence, intermediate state and rebirth 
are the same in that they involve the same realm, but they are 
different in that the conveyance and the destination are not 
identical. 

(9) The characteristics of the intermediate state are not 
mentioned, and anything that truly exists, like the five courses, has 
characteristics. Therefore the intermediate state must not exist. 

Sammitiya rebuttal: This would only become an issue if the 
Buddha had said that there was an intermediate state. Since this 
was never stated categorically, there is no reason for him to have 
mentioned its characteristics. 


364 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(10) Rebirth takes place instantaneously from one's own body 
without requiring an intermediate state. 

Sammitiya rebuttal: If this were the case, it would lead to the 
absurdity that, as that new existence has not yet arisen, that very 
body would have to take rebirth. Hence, the being arises first in the 
intermediate state from whence he passes into the next life. Leaving 
his present sphere of existence, he moves into the intermediate 
state, which seems as if empty. There, he sees an exact replica of his 
new body, which is however much subtler and more delicate. As this 
body is a product of his craving, he delights in it and thus looks 
forward to his rebirth. Hence, this point also does not prove that 
there is no intermediate state. 

After responding to these criticisms of the doctrine of an 
intermediate state, the Sammitiyas then proceed to give their own 
reasons for accepting the existence of the intermediate state. Several 
similes are given and scriptural passages cited in support of the 
reality of the intermediate state, as for example where the Buddha 
states that there is a type of person who enters nirvana via the 
intermediate state. These proofs are then rebutted by the opponent. 
The Sammitiyas have the last word, however, and restate two of 
their reasons: the Buddha sees with his divine eye that there are 
beings moving between different realms of existence, implying that 
there is an intermediate state; and without such a state there could 
be no continuity between existences, since it is logically impossible 
that death in the present life could take place at the precise same 
moment as birth in the next. 


VII. The Different Spheres of Existence (E471.c-473a.13; T205-211) 


In this rather obscure section the Sammitiyas take up the various 
types of permutations that can take place in rebirth between 
different states of existence as, for example, from the realm of desire 
to the realm of the nonidentifying gods (asamjfiisattva). The number 
of rebirths required to achieve nirvana for each of the persons in the 
four stages of sainthood is discussed. Thirteen types of persons are 
then listed: (1) an ordinary man who has not yet developed disgust 
for the realm of desire; (2) an ordinary person who has such 
disgust; (3) an ordinary person who is disgusted with the material 
realm; (4) a stream-enterer who has seven rebirths remaining; (5) 


SAMMITIYANIKAYA 365 


a once-retumer; (6) a kulamkula once-returner; (7) an ekavicika 
once-returner; (8) a nonreturner who is disgusted with material 
things and is thus born in a higher sphere; (9) three types of 
persons are delineated at this state: a person who enters nirvana in 
this very life, a person who enters nirvana through practice, and a 
person who enters nirvana without practising it; (10) a person who 
enters nirvana from the intermediate state; (11) a person who has 
disgust for material things and is reborn in a higher sphere; (12) a 
person who enters nirvana through practice at the time of rebirth; 
(13) a noble person. The differences in the number of aggregates, 
elements and senses at the time of rebirth of each of these levels are 
then delineated. The treatise ends with an exhortation to strive 
according to the dharma in order to destroy the causes that produce 
the constant revolution of the aggregates between different 
existences. 


161. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Dharmatdradhyanasiitra’”” 
162. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Ratnarasisiitra‘"® 
163. NAGARJUNA, Dvadasa(dvara)mukhasastra 


The Sanskrit title of the Chinese Taisho 1568 may be 
reconstructed as *Dvadasamukhasastra. It is regularly referred to in 
English as the "Twelve-Gate Treatise". It consists of 26 verses with 
commentary, of which 21 are identical to verses in the 33. 
Madhyamakakarikds, and one identical with a verse in 
35.Sinyatdsaptati, and it quotes the former text.*!” It was translated 
into Chinese by Kumarajiva (=T.1568); the Chinese title is Shih-erh- 
men-lun. David Ruegg informs us that it is "one of the three basic 
treatises of the Chinese Madhyamaka school" and that "The 
commentary on this work, also available in Chinese only, is ascribed 
sometimes to Nagarjuna himself and sometimes to Ch'ing-mu."° 
Christian Lindmer remarks "While there can be no doubt that 
(nearly) all the verses were originally composed by 
Nagarjuna...there are in my opinion several good reasons for 
maintaining that the author of the commentary (most probably 
identical with the compiler of the verses) is not Nagarjuna but 


366 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


rather *Pingala." He suggests he will explain why "on a later 
occasion".‘?! 

The work is available only in Chinese. It has been translated by 
Hsueh-li Cheng,’ our "T" here, and has been restored to Sanskrit 
(our "E") and summarized in English by N. Aiyasvami Sastri**. The 
Introduction to the commentary is translated in Robinson.* The 
summary below is composed by the Editor on the basis of these 


various sources. 


1. Dependent Origination (E185-189; T53-58) 


Mahayana is explained here out of compassion for people of 
modern times who are of less merit and ability to understand. A 
number of reasons are offered as to why the Mahayana is so called. 

“Factors are dependently originated; they are without 
essential nature. How can such things exist."475 
Dependently originated factors are of two kinds: internal, that is, 
mental, and external, that is, material, and their conditions are also 
of those two kinds. Since they are dependently originated they are 
without essential natures. 

If something lacks an essential nature it cannot have the nature 
of another nor have both self- and other-natures, since what is 
termed the nature of another has no essential nature either, being 
dependently originated. Otherwise everything would be the same 
and one couldn't sensibly speak of something being "other" than 
something else. Now if nothing has an essential nature, nothing-- 
whether internal or external--can actually be produced, whether 
from material factors or from the twelve items in the chain of 
dependent origination. 

Since everything is empty, aggregates, elements and senses, 
which constitute a "self", are empty--there is no self. And that being 
so, even nirvana itself must be empty. 


2. Does the Effect Exist in the Cause or Not? (E190-198;T59-69) 


DVADASAMUKHA 367 


Factors cannot be produced. 
If the effect exists in its cause it is not produced; if it 
doesn't it can't be produced; if it both exists and 
doesn't exist it can't be produced either. So how can 
there be any production?“ 
If the effect exists already in its cause and then has to be produced 
again there will be infinite regress. If it does not exist already in its 
cause and yet constitutes a product, then what comes to be will 
constitute another production, ard that too leads to infinite regress; 
the first product cannot come to be without the second. 

Again, if the produced X is real and the X that is not produced is 
also real, then there shouldn't be any difference between them. But 
if the effect is not different from the cause nothing will get 
produced. 

Objection: Though the effect pre-exists it has not yet manifested 
itself, and that's why it is not seen. 

Answer: Then how do you know it's there in the cause? There is 
no evidence of its presence. 

Objection: A thing may exist but not be manifested as distinct, 
because of any one of eight kinds of reasons: because it is too close, 
too far away, because the senses are deficient, because of 
inattention, because it is obstructed by something else, because it is 
merged with other things, because its manifestation is overpowered 
by others, because it is too small. 

Answer: But things would have been manifested if these 
deficiencies were not operating. So these cases provide no analogies 
proving the nonmanifestation of existing things. 

If the effect is present in the cause its features should be 
observable there. But on the satkaryavada view no features of the 
effect are observable in its cause, which is unreasonable. Likewise, 
if the cause has the effect in it before the effect gets produced, 
nothing can produce it. But if an effect is not produced by anything 
it must be eternal, like nirvana. Then everything will be eternal. But 
if everything is eternal nothing is, since the two contrasting terms 
require each other's possibility. But that's a contradiction! 

Now suppose you say that the effect does not pre-exist in the 
cause. In that case something could be produced from nothing, 
which is untenable. Furthermore, anything could be produced from 
anything at all. 


368 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Objection: But we know from experience that, e.g., oil does not 
come from sand but does come from sesame seeds. 

Answer: We don't know that from experience--we don't know 
where the oil came from--it just comes! Your argument begs the 
question by assuming that the effect "comes from" somewhere, that 
is, is caused by something. 

I say that cause, effect and causation are all empty. But it is the 
logic of your own position that established what I say; it is not that 
I hold any position myself. 

The effect cannot exist earlier and then both exist and not exist 
in the cause, because it is a contradiction to both exist and not exist. 

Since these three positions exhaust the possibilities and since they 
all are now refuted, it must be that all conditioned things are 
empty, as well as all unconditioned things. That being so, it is 
especially true that the notion of self is empty. 


3. Conditions (E197-198; T70-71) 


That factors have causal conditions cannot be established. 
Effects are not present in their conditions; if effects 
are not there in the conditions how could they 
come from those conditions? 

These "conditions" are four only: causal, proximate, supporting 
object and dominant. The causal condition is that from which 
something arises. The proximate condition is the factor that occurs 
just prior to the effect. The supporting object is that which 
determines the sort of factor it is--bodily, mental, etc. And the 
dominant factor is that which dominates. 

These four conditions show that an effect does not arise in its 
cause, since otherwise the cause could not occur without its effect 
occurring. 

Now if an effect, being nonexistent, can still arise from 
conditions, what stops it from arising from what are not conditions? 
So conditions do not produce effects either. 


4. Characteristic Marks (E199-205; T174-176) 


Why is everything empty? 
Both conditioned and unconditioned factors are empty, 


DVADASAMUKHA 369 


because they have no defining marks. 

What are "conditioned factors"? The distinguishing features of 
things. Shouldn't characteristic marks, such as the origin, 
maintenance and destruction of any created thing, be counted as 
conditioned factors of those things? No; if the origin (say) of things 
is conditioned then it (the origin of things) will itself have an origin, 
etc. If that origin is not conditioned how can it be a conditioned 
factor? There will be infinite regress. And likewise for maintenance, 
destruction and the rest of the conditioned factors. So all of them 
are empty. 

Objection (by a Sammitiya, according to the Madhyamakavrtti): 
Seven factors flash simultaneously: a factor (call it X), the origin of 
X, X's maintenance, X's destruction, the origin of X's origin, the 
maintenance of X's maintenance, the destruction of X's destruction. 
The origin of X produces the other six, and the origin of X's origin 
produces the origin of X. 

Answer: How can the origin of X's origin produce the origin of X, 
since it requires it to be produced in the first place? 

A possible response: It is like the lamp, which can light up the 
darkness at the precise moment of its arising. 

Answer: Then lamplight in one place should light up the whole 
world even without reaching there! 

Since conditioned things are empty, unconditioned ones are too. 
Nirvana is the unconditioned cessation of conditioned things; so it 
is empty too. 

Objection: Surely the characteristic feature of nirvana is its lack 
of characteristic features! 

Answer: We shall answer this in the next Chapter. 


5. Having and Lacking Characteristic Marks (E205-208; T79-80) 
Everything is empty, because 
A "characteristic mark" characterizes neither a 
thing with such marks nor one without them. So 
what can such a mark characterize? 
If a thing already has a characteristic mark it doesn't need another 
one. And if the thing exists without characteristic marks, having 
them is of no use--it already exists! That is why both conditioned 
and unconditioned things are empty. 


370 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


6. Unity and Diversity (E207-209; T81-84) 
Everything is empty, because 
The thing characterized and its characteristic are neither 
the same nor different; so how can they be proved? 

Objection: Obviously there is a difference between a characteristic 
and the thing it characterizes. Some marks define things--a 
conscious person is defined by consciousness. But the mark and 
thing marked don't have to share every feature. Though destruction 
of desire constitutes liberation, desire is conditioned but liberation 
is not. And some conditions are parts of the things they condition, 
e.g., origination is a part of the three marks of created things and 
also characterizes them. 

Answer: If a conscious person is defined by consciousness he 
would know himself. But nothing can know itself. An eye cannot see 
itself, a finger cannot touch itself. As for liberation and the 
destruction of desire, desire is conditioned and thus different from 
liberation, but the destruction of desire isn't. As for the three marks 
of created things, since a thing is not a created thing unless it 
possesses all three marks it isn't really the case that one of the 
marks is a "part" of the thing. 


7. Being and Nonbeing (E310-312; T85-88) 


Everything is empty because presence (positive being) and 
absence (negative being, viz. monbeing) cannot occur 
simultaneously. 

Presence and absence cannot occur at the same time. 

Too, presence cannot occur without absence; if it 

could, presence should always accompany absence.*”” 
Presence and absence are essentially incompatible. Nothing can be 
both present and absent. In the Abhidharma it is said that presence 
is always accompanied by impermanence. Without absence presence 
cannot occur. If presence could occur without absence it would 
always be eternal; but then nothing could originate. 

Objection: When something arises it is momentary but not yet 
active. When a thing is destroyed action occurs. Thus arising, 
persistence, decay and destruction take place at their appropriately 
different times, and although every factor is impermanent, a 
presence is not an absence. 


DVADASAMUKHA 371 


Answer: You say that impermanence is the mark of destruction 
and that it occurs with the presence of something that is arising. So, 
at the same time presence is produced it is destroyed. So production 
must occur at the same time as destruction. But they are opposite, 
contradictory, and cannot occur together. So what you say is 
impossible. 

You say that momentariness naturally accompanies birth, 
maintenance, decay and destruction. But that's nonsense. Suppose 
that being present accompanies impermanence. Now impermanence 
is the mark of decay. But the time when a thing is produced is not 
the time of its decay, nor is the time of its maintenance the time of 
its decay. 

So presence cannot accompany absence, nor can either occur 
apart from the other. Thus they are empty, as indeed all things are 


empty. 
8. Essential Nature (E213-216; T89-91) 


Every factor is empty, because factors have no essential nature. 
Because factors have changing characteristics 
They are without essential natures. 
What is without essential nature is empty, 
So all factors are empty.“ 

Objection: If every factor is empty then there can be no arising 
or cessation, and so no truth of frustration, of frustrations origin, of 
frustration's cessation or of the path thereto. If the four truths don't 
apply there can be no such things as monks, Buddhas, dharma, the 
order or factors in the world. But that can't be right. So it's not that 
all factors are empty. 

Answer: There are two truths--worldly and highest. Without 
practising the worldly truth the highest truth is not attainable. 
Without attaining the highest truth nirvana is unattainable. Now 
you, having heard of worldly truth, take it to be the highest truth, 
and fall to your destruction. The Buddha's law of dependent 
origination is the ultimately highest truth. Factors dependently 
originated are without essential nature, thus empty. 


372 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
9. Cause and Effect (E217-218; T982) 


Factors lack essential nature, and their nature doesn't come from 
elsewhere either. 
No results are actually experienced in their conditions, 
and they do not come from elsewhere. So 
how can any result occur? 
Argument as before. 


10. Agents (E219-224; T93-100) 


All factors are empty, since frustrations do not make 
themselves. Nor are they made by something else. Nor 
both. Nor are they made from no cause at all. So there is 
no frustration!*” 

A thing cannot make itself. 

Objection: But frustrations can be made by something else. 

Answer: If what is meant by "something else" is the collection of 
conditions then frustration is indeed made by "something else". But 
if a factor is just that collection of conditions those conditions aren't 
something else. 

The refutations of the first two possibilities refute the third a 
fortiori. And the fourth--that things arise from no cause at all-- 
involves various faults. 

The Buddha did not reply positively to the question "who or what 
makes frustrations?" because the various answers proposed (that 
oneself, another, or God made them) are incorrect; but all 
alternatives are incorrect also. 

Objection: All beings emanate from God. Frustration and 

satisfaction also come from God. He awards frustration to those who 
don't know (Him). 
Answer: If beings are sons of God He should use satisfaction to 
eliminate frustration, not saddle beings with frustrations. This is 
especially true of those who worship Him. But in truth beings act for 
themselves and experience appropriate maturations. These are not 
made by God. 

If there is a God He does not need anything. But if God doesn't 
need anything why did He bother to create? If God created beings, 
who created Him? Nothing can create itself, and if someone else 


DVADASAMUKHA 373 


created God He isn't God. Again, why did He create according to 
karmic conditions and not all at once--since He could have? Why 
did He create at all? Who created the place where He created 
beings? Another God? There can't be two Gods. 

Objection: So you've shown that the Buddha refuted four wrong 
views about frustrations, but you haven't shown that frustrations are 
empty. 

Answer: To refute the four views the Buddha shows that 
frustration arises through dependent origination. But that is just to 
show that frustrations are empty, since what is dependently 
originated lacks an essential nature, and what lacks an essential 
nature is empty. 


11. The Three Times (E224-226; T101-103) 


All factors are empty, since a cause can neither precede, succeed, 
nor océur at the same time as its effect. 

A factor cannot be proved to be earlier than, later than, 

or simultaneous with its causal factor(s). So how can 

factors constitute causes?**° 
A causal factor cannot precede what is thought to be its effect. If it 
could, it would already exist before the moment of causation--so 
what could occasion the effect? If the effect precedes the cause the 
cause is unnecessary. And if cause and effect are simultaneous they 
cannot cause each other any more than one of a cow's horns causes 
the other. 

Objection: By parallel argument you can't refute the three times: 
if your refutation is prior to what it refutes it doesn't refute; if after, 
it is unnecessary; and if simultaneous no refutation occurs. So you 
haven't refuted the three times. 

Answer: Your refutation and what it refutes share the same 
feature--both are empty. Your empty argument shows that my 
argument is empty too--this proves what I say! If I claimed that 
refutation and/or refuted exist I would be wrong--but I don't claim 
that, so there is no such problem. 

Objection: But a potter who makes a pot is earlier than the pot, 
the pupils become pupils after being taught, and the lamp is the 
cause of its light though they occur simultaneously. 

Answer: At the time there is no pot what can the potter do to 


374 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


make it? Without a pupil how can anyone teach? Since the lamp 
and its light are cotemporaneous why should one be the cause and 
the other the effect? 


12. Birth (E227-228; T104-107) 


All factors are empty, since 
What is already produced can't be produced. 
What is not yet produced can't be produced. 
Because of these facts nothing can be produced.*" 

If what is already produced needed to be produced again there 
would be infinite regress. And what is not yet produced can have no 
relation to a producer--otherwise products could occur without 
being produced. And since producing can't occur before or after the 
product, nothing can be a product. So, since nothing gets produced, 
everything should be understood to be empty. 


164. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Madhyantavibhaga 


This work is usually ascribed to Asanga, or we are told it was 
given to Asanga by Maitreya while Asahga was studying with him 
in the Tusita heaven. It seems unlikely that it is by the same author 
as the other works said to be Asanga's. Ronald Davidson writes: "I 
find it difficult to assume that the authors of the 
Mahdydnasiitralamkara and the Madhyantavibhaga were one and 
the same person. The MSA is a compilation of material, and it 
shows, in its final form, the use of multiple verse forms and literary 
devices (upamé, etc.). The MAV is a relatively straightforward 
versified astra, obsessed with the doctrines surrounding 
abhiitaparikalpa, the trisvabhava, and the path, with similes 
occurring in only three verses. Conversely, for the MSA, the cardinal 
system is that of the gotra, a term occurring once in an insignificant 
context in MAV I.19a. The longest chapter of the MAV is the final 
one, concerned with the anuttaraydna, a term which does not occur 
in the MSA. Furthermore, the relative discussions of path structure 
are ordered quite differently. Examples could, of course, be 
extended ad infinitum, but this should be sufficient."*? We are on 





MADHYANTAVIBHAGA 375 


safer ground, then, if we assume that the work is by an unknown 
author who preceded Asanga by a few years at least. 

This work has been edited a number of times (see Bibliography, 
#174.6). To the translations listed there add those contained among 
the references to translations of Vasubandhu's commentary in the 
Bibliography of Indian Philosophies under SWV and BDE in the 
Abbreviation List. 


"ET" references are to the edition and translation by Stefan 
Anacker*?. 
Summary by Stefan Anacker 


CHAPTER ONE 


Introduction (E424; T211) The following should be calculated: 
the characteristic mark, its obstruction, its nature, its antidote, 
spiritual practice, its states, the acquisition of its result, and the 
superiority of the path. 

1.(E424; T211) Construction of what was not (abhitaparikalpa) 
exists. There is no duality in it. However, emptiness does exist 
there, and it (construction) is found there (in emptiness) also. 

2.(E424; T212) Nothing is empty or nonempty; therefore 
everything is accounted for because of existence, because of 
nonexistence, and again because of existence. This is the middle 
way (madhyama pratipad). 

3.(E425; T212) Consciousness puts itself forward as the 
appearance of objects, beings, selves, and manifestations. These do 
not exist. 

4.(E425; T213) The mental construction of what was not is 
established, since it does not exist as such. But it is not altogether 
absent either. 

5.(E425; T213) There are just constructed, dependent and 
perfected ways of being, distinguished as objects, constructed things, 
and the absence of both. 

6.(E426; T214) Apprehending this, nonapprehension arises; based 
on this non-apprehension, nonapprehension arises. 

7.(E426; T214) So the essential nature of apprehension is 
nonapprehension, and so what should be understood is the 
apprehension of nonapprehension. 


376 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


8.(E426; T214-215) The construction of what was not involves 
awareness and accompanying mental factors comprising the three 
realms. Consciousness perceives things, mental factors their specific 
qualities. 

9.(E426; T215) On the one hand there is the conditioning 
consciousness, on the other experiencing. In the latter are the 
accompanying factors of experiencing, discrimination and 
motivation. 

10-11.(E427; 1215-216) Covering, establishing, leading, 
embracing, completing, triple determination, experiencing, drawing 
out, binding, turning toward, frustration. The world is afflicted in 
three, or two, or seven ways. 

12.(E427; T217) These topics need to be understood: the 
defining characteristic of emptiness, the synonymous expressions for 
“emptiness”, its purpose, its distinctions and its proof. 

13.(E427-428; T217) The absence of two things, and the 
existence of this absence, is the defining characteristic of emptiness. 
It is not existent nor is it nonexistent, neither different nor the 
same--that is its mark. 

14.(E428; T218) "Suchness", "the reality-limit", "signless", "the 
highest", "the ground of all factors"--these are the synonyms of 
"emptiness". 

15.(E428-429; T218) Nondifference, nonerroneous cessation, 
having to do with the noble realm--these are the meanings of the 
synonyms for those of good dharma. 

16.(E428; T218-219) Emptiness can be defiled or clear, impure 
or pure, like elementary water, gold or space. 

17.(E429; T219) The experiencer, his experiencing, his body, the 
world around him, are actually empty, are the ways they are 
apprehended and their purpose. 

18.(E429-430; T220) Emptiness’ purpose is attaining two good 
ends, assisting living beings, not forsaking those in samsara, the 
nondestruction of what is good. 

19.(E430; T220) The Bodhisattva cognizes so as to clear the 
lineage and the Buddha's factors and to receive the marks of a great 
person. 

20.(E430; T220) The absence of persons and factors is one 
emptiness, and the existence of this absence is another emptiness. 

21.(E430; T221) If emptiness were not afflicted, everyone would 


aa 


MADHYANTAVIBHAGA 377 


be liberated; if it were clear all effort would be fruitless. 

22.(E431; T221) But it is neither afflicted nor unafflicted, neither 
clear nor unclear, since awareness is luminous and the afflictions of 
it are adventitious. 


CHAPTER TWO 


1-3.(E432-433; T222-223) The pervading and the limited, the 
excessive and the equal, accepting and abandoning--these are called 
obstructions of the two. Their defining marks are ninefold, being 
the fetters that obstruct commitment, equanimity and the vision of 
reality by encouraging belief in a self, obstructing insights about the 
self and about objects, about frustration, about the path, the jewels, 
and the attainments of others, and by leading to one's being 
satisfied with little. Still other things obstruct goodness, etc. in ten 
ways. 

4-10.(E433-435; T224-227) These obstructions include lack of 
ability to rouse oneself from inactivity, nonuse of one's senses, 
carelessness, not doing good, not being ready, etc. (a long list). 
Obstructions arise for each of goodness, enlightenment, good 
attitude, insight, lack of confusion, nonobstruction, ability to 
develop, fearlessness, unselfishness and power. Ten corresponding 
kinds of causes of good results are listed. In addition there are 
obstructions to the limbs of enlightenment, to the perfections and 
to the sages. 

11.(E435; T228) The obstructions to the limbs of enlightenment 
include lack of skill, sloth, two destructors of concentration, 
distractedness, weakness, fixed views and susceptibility to harm. 

12-13.(E435; T228) Obstructions to the perfections include 
obstructions to lordliness, to happy states, to nonforsaking of beings, 
to the elimination of faults and the growth of virtues, to liberation, 
to inexhaustibility, to remaining well, to ascertainment, to 
enjoyment and to maturation of dharma. 

14-16.(E436; T229) The stages are themselves the antidotes to 
their obstructions, which are listed. 

17.(E437; T231) Obstructions may be divided into those that are 
defilements and those that obstruct what we can know. 


378 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
CHAPTER THREE 


1-2.(E438; T231) The aspects of reality (tattva) to be discussed 
here include basic reality (miilatattva), the reality of characteristic 
marks, the reality that is nonerroneous, the reality that is result and 
cause, subtler and grosser realities, the accepted, the aspect of 
clearing, the aspect of difference, and the tenfold aspect of skill, 
antidotes to belief in a self. 

3.(E438; T232) The threefold essential nature is nonexistent, yet 
it always exists, but not really. 

4-Sa.(E438-439; T232-233) The reality of characteristic marks 
includes the superimposition and denial of factors and persons, 
things grasped and their graspers, being and nonbeing. 

5b-6.(E439; T233) Objects are nonexistent, impermanent, arising 
and ceasing, are in basic reality with or without impurities. 

7a.(E439; T234) Emptiness as nonbeing, as the absence of this or 
that, and as nature. 

7b-8a.(E439-440; T234) Selflessness means being without a 
characteristic mark, having a different characteristic, or having itself 
as characteristic. 

8b.(E440; T235) The truth of frustration is said to arise from 
proclivities, from increase and from lack of separation. 

9a.(E440; T235) Nonarising of the double essential nature is 
considered as two kinds: impurity and peace. 

9b-10a.(E440; T236) The truth of the path involves 
comprehension, abandoning, attainment and immediate awareness. 

10b.(E441; T236) Nominal designation, progress and spiritual 
practice--but the highest pertains only to one. 

11.(E441; T237) This highest is thought of in three ways--as 
regards object, attainment and practice. It is of two sorts as 
changeless and errorfree. 

12.(E441; T237-238) What is commonly accepted is due to one, 
while what is right involves three. The twofold field of purity is only 
attained through one of them. 

13.(E441-442; T238) There are two ways of comprising--that of 
the sign and its constructions, and that of naming. 

14.(E442; T239) The aspects of positive activity are two--as 
intent and as disturbed. One is correct devotion to purity in the 
awareness of defining marks. 


MADHYANTAVIBHAGA 379 


15-16.(E442; T239-240) There is self-view when there is the idea 
of single cause, a single enjoyer or agent persisting through time, a 
single locus of defilement and of purification, of yogihood, of being 
bound or free. The aggregates are among the three natures as 
constructed, as conceptions, as objects of dharma-ness. 

17.(E443; T240-241) In regard to the first subject discussed (the 
aggregates), they can be viewed as compressed, as heaped up, or as 
distinct. Others are the seeds of the grasper, things grasped and 
their grasping. 

18.(E443; T241) Still others are doors to feelings and 
distinguishing of objects, in order to have nonsuperimposition and 
nondenial of causes, effects and effort. 

19.(E443; T242) Interdependence of what is and isn't desired, 
concerning simultaneous arising, supremacy, attainment and proper 
practice is still another topic. 

20.(E444; T242-243) Grasping, standing, remaining, experiencing 
and the two kinds of purity. The use of effect and cause, past or 
future, is still another. 

21.(E444; T243) Still others are feelings, their factors, their 
arising and removal. 

22.(E444-445; T244) Deliverance relying on oneself or others 
through awareness of merits and faults, and through knowledge free 
from conceptual constructions, should be understood. The final 
stage operates through nominal designations, through causes, signs, 
quietude and through its objects. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


1.(E446; T246) Cultivation of the establishment of mindfulness 
comes about through susceptibility to depravity, through the causes 
of desire, through the actual scope of what is termed "I", and 
through lack of confusion in relation to the four truths. 

2.(E446; T246) When one fully comprehends the problems and 
their antidotes a fourfold energy arises for their removal. 

3.(E446; T247) Skill is steadiness to the satisfaction of all 
purposes, following the eight motivating factors for the 
abandonment of the five faults. 

4.(E447; T247) These five faults are sloth, forgetting instructions, 
slackness, excitedness, lack of motivation, and motivation. 


380 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


5-7.(E447-448; T247-249) The locus, what is located in it, its 
marks, and its results; nonloss of the object of meditation, 
recognition of slackness and excitedness, motivation for their 
removal, and maintenance of tranquillity: when these factors 
conducive to liberation have been planted through energetic 
application, nonwavering attention, and investigation, the adverse 
factors are diminished. 

8-9.(E448; T249-250) Two each of the factors conducive to 
penetration are faculties and powers. The limbs of enlightenment 
are the basis limb, the essential nature limb, the limb of deliverance, 
the limb of praising others, and the threefold limb of lack of 
defilements. It is called "threefold" because of its initial cause, 
support and essential nature. 

10.(E448; T250) The limbs of the path are eightfold, comprising 
distinguishing accurately, attaining, three kinds of cultivation, and 
antidotes to adverse factors. Understanding by others comes 
through moral practice and satisfaction with little. 

11-12.(E448-449; T251) The antidotes to defilements, afflictions 
and factors opposing one's power are favorable when reversed, 
supportive when unreversed, unsupportive of reversals when 
unreversed. There are differences between supporting objects, 
mental attention, and attainment. 

13-14.(E449; T252) The stages on the way involve descending, 
preparation, fruition, the stage where there is something left to do, 
and the one where there isn't, the distinctive situation, what is 
higher and what is highest, entry, confidence, certainty, prediction, 
working toward attaining power, having good effects, and 
completion of all undertakings. 

15-16.(E450; T253) There are three kinds of ground of all 
factors: impure, impure and pure, and pure. From this the stage of 
advancement of persons is known as fitting. 

17.(E450; T253) Results include maturation, the power that 
comes through it, delight, growing, becoming clear. 

18.(E451; T254) The order in which these results occur is 
described. 


MADHYANTAVIBHAGA 381 
CHAPTER FIVE 


1-2.(E452; T256-257) The supremacy of this method lies in its 
practice, its support and its full realization. Its practice involves six 
things--the highest, attending, after-dharma, the avoidance of 
extremes, distinct and indistinct practice. Its highest is twelve-fold. 

3-6.(E452-453; 1257) The method involves generosity, 
persistence, development, inexhaustibility, continuity, lack of 
trouble, encompassing, undertaking, obtaining merit, outcome and 
fulfilment. The ten perfections correspond to these. They are giving, 
moral precepts, patience, energy, meditation, wisdom, skilful means, 
resolve, power and knowledge. 

7-10.(E453-454; T259-260) Attention comes about through three 
kinds of insight in the Bodhisattva--through nurturing sensory 
domains, through entry and through success in aims. It is connected 
with ten good acts of writing, reverencing, giving, hearing, saying, 
taking up, explaining, studying by oneself, reflecting and meditating. 
These ten acts involve an immeasurable heap of merit. 

11.(E455; T260) Practice after dharma is actions which may have 
to be taken immediately after emerging from meditation. 
Distraction may arise then. 

12.(E455; T261) Distractedness involves emergence, sensory 
experience, relishing, slackness and excitedness, deliberate 
intentions toward experience, a sense of ego in mental attention, 
and defective awareness. 

13-14.(E455-456; T261) Development of lack of reversals. In 
connection with a so-called object it may be thought "such and such 
is its name". Such a statement has meaning only because of its past 
familiarity, but is meaningless because of being a reversal. 

15.(E456; T261) There is irreversibility in regard to a thing when 
it is observed that the thing does not exist as it appears, since it 
appears with the subject-object duality. 

16-17a.(E456; T261-262) It is mental attention towards talk 
which is the only basis for the discrimination between object 
apprehended and the subject-apprehender. 

17b-18.(E456-457; T262-263) An object exists and does not exist 
like maya, etc. Everything is merely names. 

19.(E457; T263) Being freed from the ground of all factors 
because no factor is found, a universal characteristic arises: this is 


382 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


a further lack of reversal. 

20.(E457; T2630 The knowledge that the nonclarity of this 
ground consists only in the nonabandonment of reversed mental 
attention, and that clarity is its abandonment, is non-reversal in 
regard to nonclarity and clarity respectively. 

21.(E457; T264) The ground is clear like the sky. There is total 
adventitiousness of duality and this is an additional lack of reversal. 

22.(E457-458; T264) There is no affliction or thorough clearing 
either for factors or persons, and because of this nonexistence there 
can be neither fear nor pride, and this is an additional lack of 
reversal. 

23-26.(E459; T266) The practice of avoidance of extremes is 
explained. 

27-28.(E461; T2700) The similarities and differences among the 
ten stages is to be studied. Determination, the ground, what is to be 
brought about, bringing it about, sustenance, reflection, 
perseverance, penetration, extensiveness, going forth to meet others, 
remaining in a tranquil state, and pre-eminence. 

29-30.(E462; 1271) Nondeficiency, non-turning-away, 
nondistractedness, fulfilment, arising, nurturing, skill, the state of 
no-basis, the state of no obstructions, and not remaining tranquil in 
that state of no obstructions: that is full realization. 

31.(E463; T272) This work is called Madhyantavibhaga because 
it separates the Middle Path from extremes and explains them. 


165.VYAVADATASAMAYA (standardly ascribed to ASANGA), 
Mahayanasitralamkara*™ 


"ET" references are to the edition and translation by Dr. (Mrs.) 
Surekha Vijay Limaye in Bibliotheca Indo-Buddhica Series No. 94, 
Delhi 1992. Mrs. Limaye assumes without question that the same 
author also wrote the commentary often ascribed to Vasubandhu 
(which we place below under the works ascribed to Vasubandhu), 
and her book covers both works. 


Summary by Stefan Anacker 


In the Tibetan traditions this work is counted as the first of the 


MAHAYANASUTRALAMKARA 383 


five "treatises of Maitreya." This may possibly reflect a chronological 
fact, inasmuch as this work contains certain ideas which are more 
fully developed in works such as the Madhyantavibhaga and the 
Abhisamaydlamkara. But it may also be that this feature is due to 
the form of this treatise, which is really an "ornament" (alamkara) 
to the Mahayana sutras; it is in verse of varied meters which is 
highly poetic. It is thus not a tightly-organized book such as the 
two works just referred to, perhaps also for this reason. This text 
is, however, an extremely important résumé of Mahayana ethics. 


CHAPTER ONE 


1.(ET1-2) The Buddha could not avoid using words (in spite of 
their erroneousness), because of compassion for all sentient beings. 

2.(ET2-3) The dharma gives ultimate joy. 

3.(ET3-4) The words of the dharma, when put in pleasing form, 
give delight just like a reflection in a mirror.*5 

8.(ET7) The Buddhas saw the dharma with their eyes of direct 
perception. 

9.(ET8) The way of the disciple, in comparison to the Mahayana, 
is deficient because of its contradictoriness, lack of means, and lack 
of teaching things as they are. 

10.(ET9-10) Its contradictoriness relates to five: goal, teaching, 
use, support and time. 
; 11.(ET10) The dharmatad arises of itself, develops by itself, and 
1s uncontradicted because of its strength and its profundity. 

12.(ET11) The dharma is not a subject of tarka. 

13.(ET12) There are two aspects to dharma: its strength and its 
profundity. Its strength relates to the maturing of sentient beings; 
its profundity is its nonconceptual nature. 

14.(ET12-13) The great heap of lack of merit in the world is a 


oe 


1.The text is composed of 797 verses in all. Ronald M. Davidson, in 
his 1985 U. of California dissertation, suggests that 472 of these 
verses are in anustubh metre, and that "for the most part, these 472 
Verses of the MSA give a clean reading all to themselves and are 
certainly more homogeneous than the verses taken as a whole", thus 
that they may constitute the original text. 


384 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


source of dismay, 

15.(ET14) to which the antidote is the Mahayana. 

16.(ET15) The Mahay4na is based on (careful) mental attention. 

19.(ET18) Some disregard siitras they have never heard before 
because they follow only those which they have already heard. 
Such people are unperceptive. 

20.(ET18-19) And some, by constructing on received literature, 
while being based only on their own individual opinions, do harm 
to the dharma. 

21.(ET19-20) The mind itself is flawed by nature; thus there is 
an incorrect form to any statements of dharma. When the dharma 
itself becomes doubted, equanimity, the best of all, the unflawed, 
arises. 


CHAPTER TWO 


1-2.(ET24-25) The reason why the three gems (the Buddha, the 
dharma, the order) are taken as a refuge is because they all three 
deal with the saving of sentient beings. 

3.(ET25-26) Engaged in saving all sentient beings, joined with 
skills in a knowledge path, with the same delight in going forth and 
staying calm, the Mahayana sage goes everywhere. 


CHAPTER THREE 


5.(ET36) Of the three Buddhist lineages, the Mahayana is 
characterized by its compassion, its resolution, its patience and its 
practice of the perfections. 

7.(ET37) Chief obstacles to Mahayana: becoming used to 
defilements, association with bad friends, lack of aiding others and 
dependence. 

8.(ET37) The Mahayanist is interested in saving all sentient 
beings, both from their dangers and for their liberation. He is ever 
full of concern for maturing sentient beings. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


1.(ET42) The arising of the awareness of enlightenment is 
characterized by great enthusiasm, fervent taking up of both one's 


MAHAYANASUTRALAMKARA 385 


own and others’ aims, and by the great arising of the first glimpses 
of complete enlightenment. 

2.(ET43) The arising of the awareness of enlightenment gives the 
impetus for entering the Bodhisattva states. 

3.(ET43-44) The root of all Mahayana is compassion. 

7.(ET45-46) All the following are instrumental in the arising of 
the awareness of enlightenment: the friends one has, the previous 
good roots one has planted, the religious literature one has already 
heard, and being accustomed to aiding others. 

8-9.(ET46-47) The awareness of enlightenment arises only with 
a state of sameness of awareness towards all phenomena, which 
comes from a knowledge of the absence of self in all events, and a 
knowledge of the sameness of all sentient beings. 

10.(ET46-47) Liberation can be known as a skill in saving both 
"self" and "others". 

11.(ET46-47) The practice of the perfections is possible through 
resolve on dharma: its mother is compassion, the womb of this 
mother is meditation. 

12,(E46; T48) The enthusiasm which comes from taking the 
Bodhisattva's vows is due to an absence of fatigue in doing difficult 
things for a long time. 

14.(ET47-48) And nonconceptual knowledge comes in liberation. 

15-20.(ET49-50) Explanations of various metaphors used in 
Mahayana siitras for the arising of the awareness of enlightenment. 

21.(ET53) Without the arising of the awareness of enlightenment, 
sentient beings cannot obtain any of the following satisfactions: (1) 
the pleasure that comes from thinking of the aims of others, (2) the 
pleasure which comes from getting the skill in means to help others, 
(3) the pleasure of realizing the intentions in the deep Mahayana 
teachings, (4) the pleasure of seeing the ultimate truth, i.e., the 
selflessness of all factors. 

22.(ET53-54) Even placed in a bad destiny the Mahayanist 
rejoices at both satisfaction and frustration, always mindful of the 
welfare of others and filled with compassion. 

23.(ET54) No continuation in bad action is possible if one is 
unmindful of one's own body, and engaged for the welfare of 
others. 

24-25.(ET55) Knowing that all events are like a magical creation 
helps the Mahayanist have no fear of defilements or frustrations. 


386 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The preoccupation with compassion becomes finally for them like 
child's play. 

26.(ETS6) If, for the sake of others, the Bodhisattva can go even 
to avici hell, how can he be negatively affected by the harm others 
may wish to do him? 

27.(ET56-57) The Mahayanist, becomes affected by the 
frustrations of others, and is incited by the good deeds of others, 
m5 8.(ETS7) Warning against sloth or slackness in continuing 
efforts. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


2.(ET60) The Mahayana path is both for oneself and others, 
because one makes no distinction between one's own and others’ 
aims. 

3.(ET60-61) The world does not evolve so pitilessly so as to cause 
incessant frustration, for the compassionate feel the frustrations of 
others as their own. 

4-5.(ET61-62) On the divisions of practice for others' sake. 

6.(ET62-63) The path is: favoring sentient beings, unreversed 
teaching, without egoism, skillful, patient, restrained, going far, and 
indestructible. 

7.(ET63) People full of desire do themselves much harm, but 
those who love calm are always in the fundamental calm of all. 

8.(ET64) Foolish people running after their own desires always 
suffer when they don't get them; but the steadfast is engaged for 
others, and based both on his own and others’ aims, always enters 
into complete rest. 

9.(ET64-65) As far as the eye can see, there are countless 
Bodhisattvas, motivating sentient beings with right and easily 
accessible words. 

11.(ET66) The path of the one based on compassion goes 
everywhere with ultimate peace. 


CHAPTER SIX 


1.(ET68) The characteristic of the highest is that it is neither 





MAHAYANASUTRALAMKARA 387 


existent nor nonexistent, neither like this nor different, it neither 
arises nor ceases, nor diminishes, nor increases, nor is purified, nor 
is not purified. 

2.(ET69) No view of self possible. 

3-4.(ET70) It is the absence of knowledge of dependent 
origination which makes the idea of "self" arise. 

7.(ET72) Once it is understood that all objects are only talk*° 
one is situated in awareness only, and so one realizes the 
dharmadhatu by direct perception, freed from any dualities. 

8.(ET72) Having realized that there is nothing beyond awareness, 
he realizes by this the nonexistence of awareness itself, and by 
realizing the nonexistence of any duality, he is situated in the 
dharmadhatu. 

9.(ET73) And for the steadfast, by the power of conceptualizing 
knowledge, everything is equal, and so even an amassment of the 
most dense flaws is nullified like poison in a great fever. 

10.(ET74-75) Importance of mindfulness. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


1.(ET77) Strength in Mahayana practice includes knowledge of 
the birth of sentient beings, their awarenesses, their former good 
and bad actions, the location of sentient beings to be helped, and 
the means of liberating them. 

2.(ET78) Meditation is the way to arrive at these strengths. 

4.(ET79) All the world-realims and all sentient beings are like a 
magical creation. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 
1.(ET85) Maturation in dharma is characterized by: taking 
delight in dharma, serenity, peace, compassion, patience, 
intelligence and strength. 
2-8.(ET86-91) Description of each of these. 
CHAPTER NINE 


1-3.(ET103-104) Description of knowledge of everything in all 
aspects, which is unlimited and freed from all obstructions. 


388 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


4.(ET104) Though this knowledge knows all factors, it knows not 
a single one (since in ultimate truth there are no factors). 

8-9.(ET107-108) The Hinayana is inferior because it has no 
means for the removal of injuries, 

10.(ET108) and because the Mahayana leads to complete 
enlightenment. 

12.(ET109-110)*°” Mentions briefly the idea of "seeds" deposited 
in the consciousness-stream by each obstruction of a defilement or 
limitation on awareness, and that revolution at the basis is their 
obtainment in a different manner, which makes them no longer 
efficacious. It is constructionfree knowledge and is linked with 
many excellent qualities. 

22.(ET115) Suchness, Buddhahood is unclear because it does not 
distinguish the anterior and the succeeding; it is clear because it is 
freed from all obstructions. 

23.(ET115) Buddhahood is neither being nor nonbeing. 

26.(ET117) It is neither one nor many. 

37.(ET122) Since suchness is in all sentient beings without any 
differentiation, all living beings are the tathagatagarbha. 

45.(ET126)** Nirvana without a basis (apratisthitanirvana) is 
achieved. 

46.(ET126-127) In its aspect of reversion from sex, one stays in 
Buddha-bliss and looks upon all women as undefiled. 

60.(ET135) Revolution at the basis = dharmakaya. 

71-72.(ET140-141)*° Compassion, loving kindness, and 
meditation emphasized. 

77.(ET143) Because of the different kinds of enlightenment 
sought by the three different vehicles, there is not one Buddha-state, 
but many. 

78.(ET144) The state of nonexisting = the state of existing. 
When one does not apprehend anything in any way, this is the 
ultimate apprehension. 

81.(ET145-146) Seeing that all mental conceptions and all 
sensory perceptions are only constructions leads to a state of no 
mental constructions. 


CHAPTER TEN 


(ET150-158) On sustaining interest in Mahayana. In this chapter 


MAHAYANASUTRALAMKARA 389 


is the surprising statement that limitless beings obtain 
enlightenment in every moment (11). This is said as an 
encouragement against slackness in practice. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 


1.(ET159-160) Praise of the Tripitaka. 

2.(ET161) In considering the Tripitaka, the knowledge of 
everything in all modes can be reached. 

5.(ET164) Though framed in dualities, the state of the 
nonapprehension of any dualities can be reached. 

14.(ET172-173) It is an idiotic opinion that there's nothing in this 
world, and that only another world can be flawless. 

15.(T173)*° The construction of what was not is like a magic 
show, and the confusion of duality is like that which is produced in 
a magic show. 

16.(ET174) When there is no being of duality, there is the 
highest truth. When there is grasping of things it is conventional 
truth. 

17.(ET174-175) Revolution at the basis = absence of perception 
of any duality. 

18.(ET175) One should go at will, as unconfused as the world is 
confused by special signs and marks; going at will, one's going forth 
is unreversed, because of revolution at the basis. 

19.(ET175) The reason why the image of a magic show is used 
is because an appearance arises, the being of which doesn't exist. 
Thus it has both existence and nonexistence. 

20.(ET176) It is neither being, nor nonbeing, nor both nonbeing 
and being. 

24.(ET178) In an illusion, a material form is seen where there is 
only a nonmaterial perception. 

27.(ET179) All phenomena have the character of illusion, because 
of being, nonbeing, and the nondifference between being and 
nonbeing. 

28.(ET180) All phenomena are antidotal because of being, 
nonbeing, and being. 

29.(ET181) One magically created king may be defeated by 
another magically created king. 


390 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


30.(ET181-182) Image of a magical creation, dreams, mirages, 
reflections, an echo, the moon in the water. 

31.(ET183) The construction of what was not neither was nor 
was not, and is neither construction nor nonconstruction. 

32.(ET183-184) Defilements arise because of the semblance of 
duality. 

35.(ET186) Awareness is the painter: it colors all experience. 

36.(ET186-187) The only reason the Buddha spoke of 
characteristics, things having characteristics and secondary 
characteristics was to favor sentient beings. 

37.(ET187) Something having characteristics exists only because 
an awareness linked with a view arises, and consequently it can be 
divided immeasurably. 

38.(ET187-188) Its proclivities are special signs linked with the 
cognition of an "object", which is conditioned by linguistic habits-- 
this kind of appearance of an "object" is (the) characteristic of the 
constructed. 

39.(ET188)**! The constructed is based on words only. 

40.(ET189 The dependent has the characteristic of both object 
and subject: it is the construction of what was not. 

41.(ET189-190) Since it can be said to be neither being nor 
nonbeing, the sameness of being and nonbeing is seen. Since it is 
neither noncalmed nor calmed, the sameness of noncalmed and 
calmed is seen. This is the characteristic of the perfected. 

42.(ET190-191) It arises with careful mental attention. 

43.(ET191-192) It has no differentiations. 

47.(ET1940) Liberation is having realized the selflessness of 
"persons" and "factors", where sameness is known. 

48.(ET195) All dharmic preparation is only words. Once it is 
seen that all this is only words, there is nothing further to be 
realized. 

50.(ET196) The act of apprehension is itself without a nature. 

51.(ET197) Through the selflessness of all, one can realize the 
lack of arising and lack of cessation of everything, and that 
everything is calm. 

52.(ET198) Samsara has always existed, hence there is no arising 
of it. In truth, there is no previous or subsequent: there is no arising 
of factors which didn't exist before. The constructed doesn't arise by 
nature, the dependent can't arise by itself, and the perfected has no 


MAHAYANASUTRALAMKARA 391 


evolvement into another mode, thus it also can't arise. Once 
defilements are removed, they can't arise; the excellent qualities of 
Buddhas don't arise either. When all this is known, the patience 
reached through the nonarising of factors is realized. 

53.(ET199) Because of the selflessness of events, and the equality 
of all, there can be no divisions of Mahayana, Hinayana, etc. 


CHAPTER TWELVE 


(ET224-243) On the teaching of the Buddha being pure 
expedient, for the true yogi's contemplation is without object. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 


2.(ET245) Image of the dharma being a raft. 

5-6.(ET246-247) In the path of vision there is the destruction of 
all afflictions; in the spiritual path there is the destruction of all 
obstructions of the knowable. The first is also called dharma, the 
second anudharma. 

11.(ET250) There is not a single event separate from the 
dharmadhatu, thus passion, etc. are considered deliverance by the 
Buddha. 

13.(ET251) If one has recourse to the passions, one can be 
liberated from them. 

14-15.(ET251-252) There are no hell-states, and the quest for 
good qualities and calm is proper to Hinayana only. 

16-19.(ET252-253) Everything which is constructed by the 
construction of that which was not is like a magical creation, and all 
the differentiations seen there don't really exist. Awareness which 
is luminous by nature becomes flawed by adventitious flaws. 

20-23.(ET254-255) Compassion is a passion, and overcomes all 
repugnance, 

24-28.(ET256-257) The Bodhisattva has recourse to nonexistent 
conceptions for healing sentient beings. 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 


(ET259-280) Further emphasis on the contrast between 


392 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


nondiscriminatory basis (or nonbasis) of the Bodhisattva and the 
discriminations used by him to help others. 


CHAPTER SIXTEEN 


2-3.(ET285-286) Giving is a perfection of enjoyment, ethics is a 
perfection in one's being, forbearance is the perfection of service to 
others, energy is the perfection of undertaking, meditation is the 
state of rendering the afflictions powerless, and insight is being 
always unreversed in one's actions. 

One is careful to uphold an absence of hostility for the sake of all 
beings, and goes everywhere for one's own sake. 

4.(ET287) Absence of trouble and fatigue emphasized. 

6-13.(ET288-292) Enumeration of different advantages following 
from the perfections. 

14-15.(ET292-294) The reason the paramitds are enumerated in 
the manner they are is because one obtains the next by being based 
on the first. 

17.(ET300) Volition is the basis of giving, etc. 

21-22. (ET302-303) Forbearance is both for the sake of others and 
oneself, since finally one's own calm is possible through it. 

23-24.(ET304-305) Energy = enthusiasm for the beneficial. 

25-26.(ET305-306) Meditation is based on mindfulness and 
energy, and makes one able to stay ina higher faculty. 

30.(ET308-309) The giving of a Bodhisattva is neither attached, 
nor nonattached, nor both attached and nonattached, nor neither 
attached nor nonattached. 

31-35.(ET309-310) Same for ethics, patience, energy, meditation 
and insight. 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 
(ET339-377) On the worship of the Buddhas and enlightenment, 


on service to others, where compassion and affection are 
emphasized. 





MAHAYANASUTRALAMKARA 393 
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 


1-3.(ET379-380) The importance of shame at offenses committed 
for the maturing of others. It is shame that motivates the 
Bodhisattva to overcome adverse factors. Even in meditation, 
shame may be a factor, since a weaker meditation is made into a 
stronger often through its agency. 

5-7.(ET381-383) And of course regret at one's own bad actions 
stands at the basis of ethics. 

9.(ET383-384) It is even through a type of shame that the 
Bodhisattva fulfills all preparations and that the Bodhisattva does 
not become depressed by the unbeneficial acts serving as the 
maturing of sentient beings. 

10-15.(ET384-387) Further verses on importance of shame. 

16-21.(ET387-389) Importance of steadfastness for energy, 
meditational concentration, and insight. Role of steadfastness in the 
arising of the awareness of enlightenment. 

23-24.(ET390) Importance of lack of becoming fatigued or 
troubled. 

25-26.(ET391-392) Importance of knowing the Sastras. 

27.(ET392) The Bodhisattva distinguishes himself from others by 
his body, voice, and knowledge of truth. 

29-30.(ET393-394) The knowledge of the world also includes 
knowledge of meditation, since Bodhisattvas wish to join all sentient 
beings to calm. 

31-33.(ET394-395) On the refuges: one takes recourse to the 
meaning of the dharma and not to words, one takes recourse to the 
dharma and not to the idea of a person, one takes recourse to the 
astras of complete meaning and not to those that require further 
interpretation. 

34-37.(ET396-398) Bodhisattvas may be unequal in their mastery 
of the discriminations, i.e., their knowledge of dharma, knowledge 
of meanings, knowledge of languages, presence of mind. 

38-39.(ET398-399) On the preparations: all perfections serve as 
preparations. 

42-44.(ET400-402) On the establishment of mindfulness. 

45.(ET403) On the right efforts. 

50-53.(ET406-407) On the supernatural powers, which are based 
on perfection of meditation. 


394 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


55.(ET409) On the faculties (faith, etc.). 

56.(ET409) On the powers. 

57-68.(ET410-417) On limbs of enlightenment, including the 
statement (61) that equanimity is made possible by the 
nondiscrimination subsequently achieved. On the limbs of the path, 
on insight and peace. 

69-70.(ET417-418) On skill in means. 

74-76.(ET420-421) On the Bodhisattva's vows. 

77-83.(ET421-427) On emptiness, wishlessness, and signlessness. 

84-88.(ET430-433) On inner psychic accomplishment. 

89-91.(ET436-437) All phenomena are momentary, and always 
divided into different sorts: colors, smells, etc. The transformations 
of consciousness are all momentary too. 

92-103.(ET441-443) On absence of a self in all "persons", which 
includes the knowledge of the aggregates (93), the metaphor of the 
nondifference of fire and fuel (95), and the emptiness of all 
phenomena (101). 

104.(ET452) Fitted out with all the qualities enumerated in this 
Chapter, the Bodhisattva achieves both his own and others' aims. 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 


1-3.(ET455-456) Among the surprises of enlightenment are the 
ability to abandon one's own body, forbearance, equanimity, energy, 
pleasure in meditation, the nondiscriminatory state, and insight. 

4.(ET456) The "nonsurprises" are nonattachment, compassion, 
and the cultivation of antidotes. 

5.(ET457) Affection toward sentient beings emphasized. 

6.(ET457) Patience seen as the root of the highest and most 
important ethics. 

7.(ET457-458) Importance of meditation. 

8-9.(ET458-459) On giving, ethics, assiduousness in teachings, 
removing doubts regarding them, and on helping sentient beings. 

10-11.(ET459) On compassion and patience. 

12-17.(ET460-462) Faith gets sentient beings interested in 
dharma; highest ethics leads to their liberation, and highest practice 
to their impulsion. 

18-19.(ET462-463) On teaching the dharma correctly. 

20.(ET463) On patience achieved in realizing the nonarising of 





MAHAYANASUTRALAMKARA 395 


factors. 

28-29.(ET467) On giving, ethics, patience, energy, meditation, 
insight. 

32-33.(ET468) Obstacles: fraud, hypocrisy, narcissism, greed, 
turning away from calm in body and voice, going counter tu good 
speech and action. 

34.(ET469) Giving very important for getting others interested in 
dharma. 

35-37.(ET469-470) On prediction to full enlightenment. 

47.(ET476-477) There are four kinds of investigation into 
dharmas: investigations of names, investigations of things, 
investigations using the conception of essential nature, and 
investigations according to conceptions of specific characteristics. 

48.(ET477) On the nonapprehension of everything. 

49-80.(ET478-495)*” On various qualities arising at various 
moments on the Bodhisattva path. 


CHAPTERS TWENTY AND TWENTY-ONE 


3.(ET498) Specifically mentions that a Bodhisattva may remain 
a householder. 

6.(ET499) Divisions in the stages: unclear, clear, completely 
clear. 

7-8.(ET500-501) On vows, sameness of awareness, control, and 
being able to attract the crowd. 

10.(ETS02) Emptiness of the "highest self". 

11.(ETS502) Through the limbs of enlightenment there is a 
transformation of sentient beings; when these allies do not arise, 
afflictions of awareness serve to mature sentient beings. 

12.(ET502) There is only one path, and it is signless. 

15.(ET504) Enlightenment may be attained in one moment. 

17-21.(ET506-507) Highest ethics, highest awareness, highest 
insight, mental attention without signs, lack of motivating 
dispositions, and holding to samadhis all are the results of practice. 

22.(ET508) On ethics, meditation, and insight. 

23.(ET508) On the knowledge of liberation, and making this 
clear to others. 

25.(ET509) All the stages are unfulfilled, fulfilled, fulfilled and 
unfulfilled, and fulfilled. 


396 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


27.(ET510) The mark of interest in Mahayana is that one looks 
everywhere without slackness and without depression, and without 
relying on another. 

28.(ET510-511) Penetration is everywhere, the sameness of 
awareness is everywhere. Importance of skill in means to attract the 
noninitiated. 

29.(ET511-512) The Bodhisattva is neither without interest nor 
avid, neither small-hearted nor angry, based on loving kindness and 
compassion, not confused by constructions and discriminations, not 
distracted, not affected by satisfactions or frustrations, relying on 
good friends, based on religious literature and worship of the 
Teacher. 

30.(ET512-513) When enough merit has been amassed, there is 
the transformation to complete enlightenment. 

31.(ET513-514) Higher vision and calm exist in each stage. 

32-40.(ET514-519) Reasons for the names of the stages. 

41.(ET519-520) Acquisition of sustaining interest in Mahayana, 
acquisition of action, acquisition of penetration due to ultimate 
truth, and acquisition of fulfilment take place on different stages. 

43.(ET521) On compassion on one hand, rejoicing at the joy of 
others on the other hand. 

44-45.(ET521-522) On the removal of defilements. 

46.(ET523) Not enslaved by pleasures, unattached, unaffected 
negatively, meditationally concentrated. 

52.(ET527-528) Again the emphasis on fulfilling both one's own 
and others’ aims. 

53.(ET528) Honesty in dealing with students, and ability to 
attract a crowd. 

54.(ET529) On all-knowledge. 

55.(ET529-530) Activity for the sake of others isn't to be done 
only sometimes. 

58.(ET532) On cutting off the desire of all sentient beings 
through the three Buddha-bodies. 

60.(ET533 The deliverance of all sentient beings is the aim. 

61.(ET533-534) Fitted out with all these qualities, one is seen in 
the world, but yet has entered the mandalas unseen by gods and 
human beings. 





397 
ASANGA 


While there has been a large amount of scholarly speculation about the 
dates of Asanga and his brother Vasubandhu, the only accounts that 
have the authority born of antiquity appear to agree that the 
brothers were born in Purusapura, that is, modern Peshawar in 
Gandhara (modern-day Pakistan). Some accounts make them half- 
brothers, one having a Brahmin, the other a Ksatriya mother. There 
is said to have been a third brother who is referred to as 
Virificivatsa; he apparently was not a philosopher. 

Most accounts refer to some or all of the brothers entering a 
Sarvastivadin school. Hsiian-tsang specifically identifies Asaiga as 
belonging to the school of the Mahiéasikas.“? A famous story has 
Asafga studying with the god Maitreya in the Tusita heaven, but 
returning to earth to teach in Ayodhya after receiving enlightenment 
from Maitreya. Some of the works by Asanga are said to have been 
given to him in the Tusita heaven by Maitreya, their real author. 
Tradition goes on to credit Asaiga with having converted his 
brother Vasubandhu from Hinayana to Mahayana persuasion. 

While the two previously-cited works have regularly been 
ascribed to Asaiga, it seems likely they preceded him, given the fact 
that he comments on them. (This is not of course conclusive; 
authors frequently comment on their own works. And there is also 
the distinct possibility that it is a bit of both--parts of both earlier 
and later texts being written by different hands.) 

Despite the rather fulsome account of Vasubandhu's life one finds 
in the texts of Hsiian-tsang and others, what we can glean of 
Asanga's is rather shallow. 

Asanga is regularly credited with being, along with his brother, 
the founder of a school of Buddhism called "Yogacara" or 
"Vijfianavada". While there doubtless grew in due course a tradition 
known by these names, it seems premature to speak at this point of 
a school; there is no particular evidence of an attempt to gather 
converts, and the teachings as they can be gleaned from the texts 
summarized below were not immediately promulgated in classes or 
lectures, so far as we can be aware. It is quite possible that Asanga 
wrote from more than one viewpoint as his brother Vasubandhu did. 
It seems likely that at least some portions of the Yogacarabhumi 
were collected or written in the mid-fourth century. It is the author 


398 
of this material that we are identifying here as Asanga. 
166. ASANGA, Yogacarabhiimi 


It is highly likely that one would be seriously mistaken to suppose 
this vast work to be written by a single hand, or even entirely 
written within a few years time. The complexity of the situation is 
brought out by Lambert Schmithausen.™ Schmithausen argues that 
what he considers to be the oldest sections of this work preceded 
the 136.Samdhinirmocanasitra: these sections include the first two 
sections of Book One, together with sections 13 and 15 (the 
Sravakabhiimi and Bodhisattvabhiimi), along with third Book 
(Vastusamgrahani). His reasoning is based on the nonoccurrence of 
the term "alayavijfidna" in those places. Schmithausen is convinced 
that the whole Yogacarabhiimi is a compilation, and that the various 
sections which comprise that compilation are themselves 
compilations. Under the circumstances, trying to date or order the 
sections is a highly complex problem, which Schmithausen addresses 
but which we cannot hope to recapitulate here. (E.g., Schmithausen 
believes the second book of the Yogacarabhimi, titled 
Viniscayasamgrahani, was written by someone else than Asanga, 
presumably at some time after Asanga's lifetime.) Thus the summary 
we provide follows the organization of sections as they are found in 
the work as known to us today, but one should be careful not to 
draw any conclusions based on chronology from the appearance of 
any terms or doctrines in this summary without careful consultation 
of the sources.““5 


VOLUME ONE: Bahubhtimikavastu 
CHAPTER ONE (paficavijfianakayasamprayuktabhtimi) 


"E" references in the summary of Chapters 1-5 are to the edition 
by Vidhusekhara Bhattacharya, Calcutta 1957. 


(E4-6) The five bodies of consciousness are auditory, gustatory, 
olfactory, tangible and visual awareness. Each has its loci: e.g., the 
locus of visual awareness occurs together with the vision of it, 
whereas the locus of mental awareness immediately precedes it. 


yOGACARABHUMI 399 


The locus of all seeds is the storehouse consciousness.**° Loci are of 
two sorts: material and immaterial. Visual loci are material; the 
others are immaterial. 

The modes (paryaya) of visual awareness are colors, shapes, and 
the awarenesses of them. 

There are mental factors associated with the senses: attention, 
touch, feeling, identification and thought. 

Karma is of six varieties: (1) awareness of the supporting object 
of an action, (2) awareness of an object's specific characteristic, (3) 
awareness of present time, (4) awareness of a single moment, (5) 
mental awareness of the object's double aspect (as implying grasped 
and grasper), and (6) awareness of the arising of karma following 
good defilements. 

(E6-10) Specific definitions of auditory, olfactory, gustatory, 
tactuai and visual awarenesses. 


CHAPTER TWO (manobhiimi) 


(E11-13) A mental state may be considered (1) in itself, (2) as 
locus, (3) as supporting obect, (4) as a combination of factors, and 
(S) as karma. In themselves mental states are just mind. As loci 
they contain the seeds, they are the storehouse consciousness. As 
supporting objects they may be any factor, but only feelings, 
identifications and conditioning factors are seeds of various sorts of 
conditions. As a combination of factors they include a large variety 
of types of factors (which are listed). As karma they involve (1) the 
awareness of an action's impact on something else, (2) awareness 
of something of the same kind as the action's content, (3) awareness 
of something that happened in the past, is happening, or will 
happen, (4) momentary awareness, (5) awareness of factors and 
actions whether desired or not, pure or impure, (6) awareness of 
someihing breeding desired or undesired results, (7) outflows of 
awareness. 

How are supporting objects constructed? In seven ways: 
construction of (1) an object previously experienced, (2) a future 
object, (3) an object occurring only through the force of the essence 
of its content, (4) an object arising in the path of dharma, (5) an 
object that is stopped when the path is followed, (6) a past or 


400 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


future object arising from desire, hatred, violence, etc., (7) of 
constructions good or neutral, such as renunciation, absence of 
malice, kindness, etc. which occur conjoined with good factors like 
faith, etc. 

(E13-15) A supporting object may be determined through 
discipline, not so determined, or neither. It is determined through 
discipline when one takes what is fleeting as persisting, what is 
frustrating as satisfying, what is impure as pure, what lacks self as 
having a self. It is not determined through discipline when an 
existent thing is undermined by the false awareness that it is merely 
apparent, or when the awareness of a factor is thought to be about 
an actual object, or when correctness is imputed to a factor by a 
higher pure awareness. 

A variety of mental states are now distinguished, including 
arrogance, infatuation, sleepiness, fainting, nonattachment, etc. 

(E18-21) The intermediate state. Stream-enterers and once- 
returners are reborn with self-affection. But nonreturners are reborn 
without self-affection. They quickly experience the fruits of their 
good or bad karma in heaven or hell. There are two sorts: excessive 
and weak. The karma of an excessive person is difficult; the karma 
of the weak is easy. But in the upper realms everyone's karma is 
weak. In the material realm there is temporally spaced out action 
among all the senses, while in the realm of desire all the senses 
operate atemporally without the senses. The pure are said to have 
a quiet death, the impure an unquiet one. 

All the senses persist in the intermediate state. The intermediate 
state of those who did bad things is hard--e.g., they are blind; the 
doers of good have "bright nights", pure divine eyes. But since there 
is a desire to continue self-existence there is no accomplishment of 
the blocking of consciousness; their desire for the manifoldness of 
awareness arises again, and they enter the bodies of men or gods 
once more. 

(E21-23) Conception described. Faulty seeds arising from mother 
and/or father analyzed. 

(E23-27) Life in the womb described.**” 

(E27-30) Birth.“ 

(E30-36) The wheel of rebirth. 

(36-72) The cycle of existence. Geography; review of the 
meditative states; different kinds of beings; the six receptacles, seven 


YOGACARABHUMI 401 


embracing objects, ten requisites, eight states, various other such 
sets. 


CHAPTERS THREE TO FIVE (savitarkadibhimi) 


(73-76) The three states are the realm of desire, the material and 
the immaterial realms. 

(76-77) The different sizes of the various kinds of beings from 
insects to gods. 

(E77-79) Length of life discussed. 

(E79-90) Sexual aspects of the lives of the various kinds of 
beings, from those in various hells to the gods. 

(E90-99) Sustained thought in the material and immaterial 
realms. 

(E100) Sexual enjoymeiit. 

(E101-102) Range of seings where sexuality applies. 

(E102-103) Range of beings where satisfaction applies. 

(E103) Three longings--for love, for existence, for a religious life. 

(E103-104) The kinds of rebirth. 

(E105-106) The ways of identifying a causal effect are four: by 
its characteristic mark, by its support, by its species, by its 
conditions. A cause precedes its effect. !ne effect that is dependent 
upon, collocated with, and involves either the attainment, the 
establishment, the fulfilment or the action of a factor--of those that 
factor is its cause. Examples. 

(E106-107) Fifteen kinds of results of causes are listed: speech, 
experiences, traces, natural results, seeds, liberation, contents of 
awareness, sense-organs, actions, human doings, sights of the truth, 
conforming effects, various causal efficacies, sufficient conditions, 
impediments, nonimpediments. 

Ten kinds of causes. Four kinds of conditions. Five kinds of 
results. 

(E107-114) Fifteen kinds of results are explained, compared and 
contrasted. 

(E114-117) The basic aspects of attention are classified as seven; 
with respect to attention's abode, to its actual object, to its 
investigation, to its experience, to its right understanding, to the 


402 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


accumulation of it on the disciple's path, to its accumulation on the 
Buddha's path, and to the setting aside of it by attaining the 
perfections. 

(E118) Sixteen mistaken views are now discussed: (1) That 
causes and effects exist. Specifically, the argument attacks Samkhya 
(Varsaganya is mentioned by name) and Mimamsakas. 

(E120-122)*” (2) Refutation of the view that there is 
manifestation of the cause in the effect (satk@ryavdda). Several ways 
of understanding the theory that the effect exists in the cause are 
considered. E.g., does the effect exist while the obstruction which 
precluded its production still exists, or not? Is it the effect's existing 
which constitutes the obstruction, or the effect's nature? Is the cause 
different from the effect or not? None of the possible answers to 
these questions satisfy. So it must be concluded that if something 
exists it is perceived, and if it doesn't, it isn't perceived. However, 
under certain conditions an existent thing may not be perceived--if 
it's too far away, too subtle, if one isn't paying attention, if the 
senses are temporarily deranged, etc. 

(E122-129) (3) That past and future factors exist is refuted. 

(E129-137) (4) That selves exist is refuted.*©° 

(E137-139) (5) Eternalism refuted. 

(E139-140) (6) That previous causes still exist refuted. 

(E140-142) (8) That things are produced by previous deeds 
refuted. 

(E144-145)**! (9) That God exists refuted. God cannot be the 
creator of the universe. Either He is in the universe or outside it. If 
He's in it He can't create it; if He's outside it He has no relation to 
it. Again, if He created the universe He must have done it either 
purposefully or accidentally. If purposefully, He is not the Lord, 
since He is at the mercy of His purpose, and if accidentally, He does 
not create the universe. Does He create by Himself alone or with 
help? If by Himself alone He is both cause and effect and no 
creation occurs. If He creates with help who provides the help? If 
God alone creates the help He cannot do it seriatim, and if someone 
else creates the help God is not the Lord, someone else is! 

(E145-147) (9) That killing is right is refuted. 

(E148) (10) That there is either an end or no end to things is 
refuted. 

(E149-150) (11) That death need not be avoided is refuted. 


YOGACARABHUMI 403 


(E150) (12) That there are no causes is refuted. 

(E150-155) (13) Nihilism is refuted. 

(E155-156) (14) Pride is criticized. 

(E156-159) (15) The view that one is pure is refuted. 

(E159-160) (16) The view that one is auspicious is refuted. 

(E160-166) On the defilements. 

(E166) Seven erroneous views about identification, view, 
awareness, persistence of things, about satisfaction and frustration, 
about purity and impurity, and about self. 

(E166-170) Of synonyms for the defilements. 

(E170-181) Of afflictions. 

(E181-188) Distinguishing marks of factors. 

(E188-193)**? Perverted karmic views about action, appropriating, 
pleasure. 

(E194) Seven kinds of disadvantage. 

(E195-196) Lack of self-restraint. 

(E198-203) Dependent origination. 

(E204-232) The twelve members of dependent origination 
discriminated. The order of their occurrence. The etymology of the 
term "pratityasamutpdda". The twelve conditions distinguished. 
Supporting passages cited. 


CHAPTERS SIX AND SEVEN (samdhita- and asamahita-bhiimis) 


These Chapters are not available in Sanskrit. According to Alex 
Wayman*® these two Chapters "discuss the psychological states that 
were discussed extensively in the first five bhimis...from another 
standpoint." Lambert Schmithausen has translated one passage from 
Chapter 6,*4 a passage he takes to "represent the starting-point of 
alayavijfadna theory", that is, a theory of the storehouse- 
consciousness, as follows: 

"When a person has entered (absorption into) the concentration 
trance, his awareness and mental concomitants have ceased; how, 
then, is it that (his) consciousness has not withdrawn from his 
body? - (Answer:) No problem, for in his case alayavijfiana has not 
ceased (to be present) in the material senses, which are unimpaired: 
dlayavijfigna embraces the seeds of activated consciousness 
(pravrttivijfiana), so that they are bound to re-arise in future (i.e., 
after emerging from concentration)."° 


404 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
CHAPTERS EIGHT AND NINE: (sacittaka- and acittaka-bhiimis) 


These two brief chapters are edited by Alex Wayman*® and 
Lambert Schmithausen**” 


CHAPTER TEN: Srutamayi 


The latter part of this Chapter is presently available in Sanskrit 
in the Sravakabhiimi manuscript photographed by Rahul 
Sankrtyayana in the 1930s in Tibet. These photographs are held by 
the Bihar Research Society, Patna. This ‘section has not been 
published. Some passages are referred to by Schmithausen.*** 


CHAPTER ELEVEN: Cintamayt 


About three-fourths of this Chapter is known to us in Sanskrit 
through the manuscript of the Sravakabhiimi procured by Rahula 
Sankrtyayana from Tibet in the 1930s. According to Alex Wayman 
three sets of gathds--verses--with Asaiiga's commentary are included 
in this manuscript, two of which sets he has edited and translated. 
He suggests that the three, titled Abhiprayikarthagatha, 
Paramarthagatha and Sarirarthagatha, deal respectively with three 
“instructions of morality, higher awareness and_ higher 
virtue...promulgated for the monks, not for laymen."*°° 

Alex Wayman's edition and translation is referred to here as 
"ETW". Lambert Schmithausen has edited and translated verses 28- 
41 of the Paramarthagatha with their commentary. His 
translation is referred to below as "ETS". 


1. Abhiprayikarthagatha 

1. (ETW 354, 357) Brahma Sahampati asked the Buddha: You 
have completed spiritual training and resolved all doubts. Tell me 
what that training is! 

2-5. (ETW 354, 357-358) Answer: Morality, higher virtue and 
higher awareness are the three parts of spiritual training. One 
should be moral and follow the code of discipline with steady 
awareness in four ways through the four meditative states. The four 
ways involve good roots, inner peace, adoption of right views and 


YOGACARABHUMI 405 


avoidance of wrong ones. 

6-13. (ETW354-355, 358-360) Ridding oneself of the sensual 
realm one should attain the upper realms and liberation. Morality 
brings higher virtue and awareness, while higher virtue brings on 
higher awareness and the morality of meditation. Higher awareness 
brings on liberation. One should cultivate them both independently 
and as combined. 

14-23. (E355, 360-361) The three parts of spiritual training have 
respectively three aspects: giving up possessions, eliminating 
depravity, and perception of the four truths. The first aspect does 
not require a meditative object but the last two do. The practitioner 
is encouraged to be diligent in his practice and to avoid a variety of 
wrong or distracting tendencies, avoiding the extremes of sensual 
indulgence and asceticism. 

24-38. (ETW355-356; 362-363) Specific advice to the adept as to 
how to behave, including what to wear, posture, attitudes to self 
and others, how to beg, avoidance of wrong thoughts such as the 
theory of the Lokayatas, right friends and associates, maintenance 
of faith. 

39-51. (ETW356-357, 363-366) Specific advice as to how to 
practise higher awareness by avoiding the five hindrances, 
eliminating eight attitudes involved in sensual desire, listening to 
the dharma and eliminating the depravity of the defilements. 


2. Paramarthagatha 


1. (ETW167, 174, 178) No one owns, does or feels anything. All 
factors are inactive, yet actions occur. That is, there is no self 
relating to factors: still, ownership, action and feeling take place. 

2. (ETW168, 174, 178) The twelve aspects of the life-continuum 
comprise aggregates, senses and elements; no person (pudgala) is 
found among them. 

3. (ETW168, 174, 178) All is empty, both personal and external, 
and there is no one who cognizes emptiness. 

4. (ETW 168, 175, 179) The "self" is no self. It is only something 
erroneously constructed. Factors are causally conditioned. 

5-9. (ETW168, 175, 180) All conditioned factors are momentary. 
How can they act? Sensory "activity" is just the occurrence of the 
factors, and it is that occurrence that is called "agent". The senses 


406 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


don't do anything. Rather, things arise dependently and are 
naturally destroyed. 

10-12. (ETW169, 175, 180-181) There are two ways of being-- 
deluded and desirous. The twelve members (of dependent 
origination) can be divided between the two--ignorance and feeling 
arising from delusion, desire through old age and death arising from 
desire. 

13-18. (ETW169-170, 175-176, 181-182) Actions are not done by 
a self, or by another, or by previous karma; still, they occur. 
Conditioning factors can't be known as present, past or future. 
Matter is like foam, feeling like a bubble, identification like a 
mirage, conditioning factors like plantains and consciousness like 
maya. 

19-20. (ETW170, 176, 182) No one really deludes anyone, yet 
there is delusion, which is unreasoned attention. 

21. (ETW170, 176, 182) Conditioning factors breed good or bad 
perceptions. Though changeless they are thought to breed bodily, 
vocal and mental karma. 

22-26. (ETW170-171, 176, 183) If conditioning factors are 
changeless how is it that awareness is said to change as a result of 
changes in factors? It doesn't really; saying so is conventional, just 
as speaking of the self as exhibiting similarities and dissimilarities 
within its stream is merely conventional. No one really does or feels 
anything; no one experiences the fruits of karma. 

28-31. (ETS228-229, 234-236) The cause is delight in 
manifoldness, along with satisfying and frustrating karma. The result 
is maturation of all seeds with what is and what is not desired. This 
result comes to be viewed as the self, known only to one's own 
experience, being immaterial and shapeless. This belief in self 
spawns many other false views through taking things to be solid, 
through tracing it to its own seed, through habit, through bad 
companions, through listening to mistaken doctrines. 

32-38. (ETS229-233, 236-241) From this in turn there arises 
attachment to oneself, and from wanting benefits to oneself comes 
coveting of outside things. What people fear they attract through 
their delusion. Having stuck to them before, they experience 
manifold things.**' — Ceaseless frustrations arise from these 
experiences, leading to the ideas of ego, of satisfaction and 
frustration. Frustration is like a mire in which one is stuck like an 


YOGACARABHUMI 407 


elephant, or a lake comprising all streams there are in this world, 
which cannot be dried up by fire, wind nor sun, but only by dharmic 
conduct. By thinking "I am frustrated" or. "I am satisfied" one 
conceives frustrations as one's self, a false view.* 

39-44. (ETS232-233, 241; ETW172-174, 177-178, 185) Each 
defiled awareness arises with defilement and ceases with it; one 
cannot gain release from them. It is not this same awareness that 
arises later as purified, but another awareness that is called 
"liberated from defilements." So any defiled awareness is absolutely 
defiled, any pure one altogether pure. So no one, nothing is purified 
from anything. 

Liberation is of two kinds; from defilements and from actual 
objects. Liberation from defilements comes from destroying all seeds 
by ending defilements. It brings in turn liberation from actual 
objects, an end to manifoldness. Nothing transmigrates, no person, 
no factors--nothing, indeed, arrives at final liberation. 


3. Sarirarthagatha*® 
CHAPTER TWELVE: Bhavanamayi"™ 
CHAPTER THIRTEEN: S$ravakabhitmi 


There is only one, partial Sanskrit manuscript of this Chapter 
known to exist: it is held in the K.P. Jayaswal Research Institute in 
Patna. Chinese, Tibetan and Japanese versions are in addition 
available. Alex Wayman published in 1961 the text and a translation 
of those sections in the Patna manuscript;*® this is our "T". More 
recently Karunesha Shukla has edited those sections together with 
a reconstruction from Tibetan into Sanskrit of the sections missing 
from the Patna manuscript.*® This is our "E". 


Section One 
Part I: On Lineage (gotra) 
(T58-60) A person's lineage is his seeds. One stays in his lineage 


and does not obtain final liberation for four reasons: (1) because he 
is born in unfavorable circumstances, (2) out of carelessness, (3) 


408 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


because he follows wrong paths, or (4) because of conversion to a 
wrong faith. 

(ES-6; T60-63) Favorable conditions for one's lineage are primary 
or secondary. The primary conditions are being made aware of 
correct dharma and by methodical attention to it. The secondary 
conditions are as follows: (1) Blessings of nature, such as (a) being 
born as a human being, (b) being born in a noble family, (c) having 
all one's organs in proper working order, (d) faith in Buddhism, (e) 
a proper occupation. 

(E6-16; T61-63) (2) Blessings of good association with others, 
e.g., with Buddhas, with the Buddhist teaching; maintenance of 
dharma, the sympathy of others. (3) Good interest in dharma, 
involving commitment to dharma, moral restraint, restraint of the 
senses, eating proper amounts of food.” (4) Staying awake. (5) 
Alert conduct. (6) Seclusion. (7) Removal of obstructions-- 
comprising sensual interests, malice, lethargy and_ sleepiness, 
excitedness and regret, and perplexity. (8) Remaining concentrated 
in the four trance states. 

(E16-22; T63-64) The marks of a person belonging to a lineage 
are explained. The varieties of such persons are set forth. 


Part 2: On Entry Onto the Path 


(E25-32; T65-66) Entry has four aspects: (1) its nature, (2) its 
establishment, (3) its marks, and (4) the one entering. (1) The 
nature of entry involves faithful practice of dharma. (2) The stages 
of entry differ depending on whether the one entering is merely 
potentially entered, is of weak, middling or strong merit, is of firm 
application, or is one who has "gone to liberation" (i.e., a noble 
person). (3) How these stages are related to each other is explained. 
(4) The marks of a person's entry and who those marks characterize. 


Part 3: On deliverance (naiskramya) 


(E35-37; T66-67) The way to deliverance includes the worldly 
and supramundane paths and the preparation for them. One on the 
worldly path views the lower meditative trances as gross and seeks 
the tranquility of the higher trance states, thus attaining 





YOGACARABHUMI 409 


nonattachment and arriving at the stage of neither-identification- 
nor-nonidentification. The supramundane path involves both vision 
and meditative practice, and ends in detachment from both. These 
paths require the "secondary conditions" of Part 1 above, along with 
other similar practices. 

(E37-63; T68-71) Moral restraint includes practice of the 
pratimoksa vows, orderly conduct, proper posture, proper speech, 
the five practices of a monk, spiritual training, etc. These can be 
summarized into three requirements: continuation of proper 
practice, its essential nature, and its naturally good character. Ten 
causes that undermine morality are explained. The Buddha used 
various terms to characterize morality, such as "root", "ornament", 
"ointment", "good practice", "restraint", etc. These are each 
explained. The ten benefits accruing from moral practice are 
explained. 

(E63-73; T68, 71) Explanation of restraint of the senses, 
involving their mindful and intelligent guarding. Bad factors-- 
attachment, delusion--flow in all awareness; restraining the senses 
cuts off these factors. 

(E73-97; T150-162) Explanation of what and how one should 
eat. 

(E97-111; 171-73) Explanation of staying awake and alert 
conduct: how one should conduct meditation without being 
distracted by the five obstructions; how one should rest without 
falling asleep. 

(E111-127; T74) Explanation of seclusion--the sorts of places one 
should choose for meditation. 

(E127-140; T74-78) Who is a "good friend"? One who is moral, 
learned, wise, compassionate, not depressed, forbearing, confident 
and speaks well. Such a person can be trusted as he encourages, 
reminds one about things that need to be understood, gives good 
advice, teaches the dharma. That dharma was explained by the 
Buddhas and their disciples, and comprises twelve sorts of things: 
passages from the siitras, verses from the sittras, predictions of 
deaths and rebirths, other verses, teachings, the foundations of 
morality (e.g., in the pratimoksa), instructive examples, tales of 
former lives, Jataka stories, other instructive stories, specification of 
the features of dharma, of Buddhas and others, and the 
Abhidharma. 


410 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(E140-143; T78-80) Reasoning is called for in respect to six 
matters: self, beings, the world, karma, the shared and the specific 
features of things. Reasoning is of two kinds: counting and 
examining. Examining in turn has four kinds: consideration of what 
things depend on for their origination and for their designation; 
consideration of things' causal relations; consideration of the proofs 
of things; and consideration of their nature as factors--how factors 
arise and what their nature is. 

(E144-149; T80-81) Renunciation is analyzed. What one should 
give, to whom, with what attitude. 

(E155-166; T81-83) A monk is characterized as having faith, 
guileless, rarely ill, energetic, wise, desiring little, observing a dozen 
or so ways of living (prescribed in the dharma literature) starting 
with giving alms, begging, controlling what one eats, where one 
dwells, how one sits. 

Section Two 


(E169-183; T83-85) Twenty-eight kinds of persons on their way 
to deliverance are described: they are (1) of lazy senses, (2) of keen 
senses, (3) strongly attached, (4) strongly hating, (5) largely 
confused, (6) basically proud, (7) thoughtful, (8) equally attached, 
hating and deluded, (9) weakly attached, (10) stream-enterers, (11) 
satisfied with results, (12) faith-followers, (13) followers of dharma, 
(14) resolved in faith, (15) view-attainers, (16) eye-witnesses, (17) 
with only seven rebirths ahead, (18) reborn in the same kind of 
family, (19) single-seekers, (20) liberated in the intermediate state, 
(21) liberated in this birth, (22) conditionally liberated, (23) 
unconditionally liberated, (24) going upward in the stream, (25) 
liberated at a specific time, (26) of steadfast dharma, (27) liberated 
by wisdom, (28) liberated both ways. 

(E184-192; T85) Persons can be analyzed in eleven ways in 
relation to their (1) sense-organs, (2) group (i.e., various kinds of 
monks), (3) conduct (e.g., desirous, hating, deluded, proud), (4) 
vow (disciple, self-enlightened, Mahayanist), (5) mode of progress, 
(6) path and result (stream-enterer, etc.), (7) application, (8) 
Meditative attainment, (9) rearising, (10) time of release, (11) 
manner of release. 

(E192-258; T86-91) What does one meditate on? Four kinds of 
supporting objects: (1) what is pervaded, (2) for the purification of 





YOGACARABHUMI 411 


conduct, (3) what is skilful, (4) for the purification of defilements. 

The supporting object that is pervaded is of four kinds: (a) the 
image attended with conceptual constructions, which is the object 
of insight, (b) the image devoid of conceptual construction, which 
is the object of peace. (The image in either (a) or (b) is the 
reflected image, or thought, of the kinds of supporting objects (2)- 
(4) of the preceding paragraph); (c) the limits of actual entities of 
two sorts--the phenomenal limit of the entity and the noumenal 
limit of the entity; (d) the fulfilment of the requirement, the 
meditative object in fruitional stage, so that the meditator is free 
from depravity. (c) and (d) are the object of peace and insight 
combined .* 

(2) The supporting objects for the purification of conduct are of 
five kinds: (a) foul objects, (b) loving kindness, (c) origination 
dependent on a thing, (d) analysis of the elements, (e) mindfulness 
of inspiration and expiration. 

(3) The supporting objects for skill are of five kinds: (a) 
concerning the aggregates, (b) concerning elements, (c) concerning 
senses, (d) concerning dependent origination, (e) concerning abode 
or no abode. 

(4) The supporting objects for purification of defilements are of 
two kinds: (a) grossness of lower realms and calmness of higher 
realms, (b) the four noble truths. 

How to meditate on each kind of supporting object is explained. 

(E258-348; T92-105) Four kinds of precepts: (1) nonerroneous, 
(2) successive, (3) traditional, (4) of attainment. 

Three kinds of spiritual training: (1) concerning higher 
virtue, (2) concerning higher awareness, (3). concerning higher 
wisdom. 

Ten kinds of factors for the adaptive knowledge of spiritual 
training: (1) prior cause, (2) adaptive teaching, (3) correct practice, 
(4) persevering respect, (5) intense interest, (6) basis for application 
of yogic power, (7) allayment of bodily and mental depravities, (8) 
constant reflection, (9) nondiscouragement, (10) lack of conceit. 

Four kinds of breakdown of yoga--permanent, temporary, 
backsliding, wrong acquisition. 

Four aspects of yoga--faith, interest, energy, method. 

Four sorts of meditative attention: (1) careful, (2) interrupted, 
(3) uninterrupted and (4) effortless. 


412 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


There follows discussion of a different set of four kinds of 
attention; of four signs of meditative objects and how they are to be 
treated; of the kinds of yogis (beginner, doer, and transcender of 
yoga); of the ways of cultivating yoga (cultivation of conceptual 
identification and cultivation of the thirty-seven limbs of 
enlightenment); of thirty-five kinds of bodies; of twenty kinds of 
awareness; of the establishment of mindfulness as antidote to the 
four delusions; of the four supernatural footings or concentrations 
(interest, energy, awareness and deliberation) and why they are 
called "supernatural footings"; of the five faculties (faith, energy, 
mindfulness, concentration and wisdom); of the good roots 
constituting aids to penetration; of the seven aids to enlightenment; 
and of a number of other such classifications. 


Section Three 


(E351-388; T105-116) How the pupil should seek a teacher, and 
how the teacher should respond. First the would-be pupil should be 
questioned about his preparation and commitment, his lineage and 
his ability. Where one should meditate, where to sit, how to 
concentrate are discussed. There are nine kinds of peaceful 
concentration and four kinds of insight concentration. Insight 
concentration has three doors: associated with signs alone, 
associated with investigation, associated with reflection. 

As well, insight concentration involves six ways of analysing what 
is to be meditated on into (1) the meanings of the terms used, (2) 
the internal or external entities to be meditated upon, (3) the 
marks--general and specific--by which the object is to be identified, 
(4) whether the object is good or bad, (5) the time of the object's 
occurrence, (6) the ways of construing the object in terms of (a) 
what it depends on or is depended on by, (b) its causal relations to 
other things, (c) how it is known, (d) what kind of factor it is. 

The application of these six ways of analyzing to various sorts of 
objects of meditation follows, e.g., foul things, loving kindness, and 
other kinds of objects identified in Chapter 2 above. 

(E388-398; T116-120) Nine kinds of "white" applications of 
concentration can be distinguished: (1) concordant, (2) repeated, 
(3) nondeviant, (4) energetic, (5) timely, (6) understanding, (7) 
discontented, (8) untroubled, (9) right. There are also nine opposed 


YOGACARABHUMI 413 


"black" kinds of application. "White" applications do not bind the 
practitioner, "black" ones do. 

(E398-434; T120-124) Obstructions are removed by 
ascertainment of their essential natures, of their foundations, of 
their disadvantages and of their antidotes. There are four sorts of 
obstructions (G@varana) so removed: distress, obstructions (nivarana), 
thought that is only initial, and adherence to ego. 

How to cultivate one's attention: by distressing one's awareness, 
by causing it to overflow, by tranquillizing it, and by purifying it. 
Examples are given, and the stages of such cultivation described, 
with appropriate quotations from canonical scripture. 


Section Four 


(E437-470; T125-129) The yogi whose attention has been 
cultivated proceeds by two courses--worldly or supramundane. 
Followers of the worldly path are of four kinds: outsiders, those who 
have practised peacefulness with weak dharma, those who have 
practised peacefulness with keen dharma but whose good roots 
haven't yet matured, and Bodhisattvas who wish to delay 
enlightenment till a future life. Again, followers of the worldly 
course are of two kinds: ordinary folk and spiritual trainees. They 
seek nonattachment to sensual pleasures through the realms by 
gaining peace through practising meditation and being reborn again. 
Such beings range up to those nonattached in the realm of 
nothingness, or who have attained the five higher faculties. 

This is further explained by reviewing the four trance states (of 
matter, etc.) and the four boundless states. It is explained how one 
accomplishes the five higher faculties and gains supernatural 
powers. 

(E470-498; T130-132) As for the supramundane path, one who 
follows it, whether of cultivated attention or a meditator in the first 
or second trance states or in the boundless states, comes to realize 
the truth of frustration under four aspects--the impermanence of 
frustrations, their unsatisfactoriness, their emptiness and their 
lacking a self-nature. Next he comes to realize the truth of the 
origin of frustrations under four aspects--the cause of frustrations, 
their origin, their sources, and their conditions. Then he comes to 
realize the truth of the cessation of frustrations under four aspects- 


414 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


its being cessation, its peace, its excellence and its constituting 
deliverance. And he comes to realize the truth of the path under 
four aspects--its being a path, its logic, the understanding of it and 
its leading to liberation. 

The truth of frustration is again analyzed into ten aspects--as 
involving change, destructibility, separation, closeness, factors, 
bondage by fetters, disagreeableness, unsuccessfulness, being 
without content and dependent. 

Change is classified in fifteen weays, and again in eight ways, and 
discussed at length from various standpoints. The defilements are 
transitory and changeful, breeding disease and death; they are 
uncountable and decaying. They are not caused by God's magic. 

(E499-503; T132-133) Having abandoned egoity one grasps the 
highest state of liberated objectless consciousness; one experiences 
the highest worldly factors. But the very highest awareness is not 
this awareness. Rather, it is the succeeding state of constructionfree 
perception gained by the nonreturner free from attachment, who 
has risen from the prior stages of stream-enterer and once-returner. 

(E503-511; T133-134) What is the nature of spirituality, and how 
does one get it? Its nature is the attentive repetition of those good 
conditioned factors, the highest worldly factors. There are eight 
kinds of spiritual deeds, or eleven kinds of contemplation (of peace, 
of insight, of the worldly path, of the supramundane path, of weak, 
middling and intense contemplation, of the path of application, of 
the proximate path, of the liberating path, of the distinctive path). 

Concentration at this level is called "diamond-like" (vajropama)-- 
why? Because, like a diamond, this concentration is the best among 
the gems, it scratches everything else but is not scratched by 
anything else. 

The noble state is the state of emptiness, signless, aimless, the 
attainment of cessation, abiding in loving kindness, compassion, joy 
and equanimity. 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN: Pratyekabuddha 


(This brief Chapter has been edited by Alex Wayman.*®) 

The Buddha who is self-enlightened is examined from five 
standpoints: his lineage, his path, his complete knowledge, his 
states, and his conduct. 


yOGACARABHUMI 415 
CHAPTER FIFTEEN: Bodhisattvabhumi 


Our summary of this the largest Chapter of the first Book of the 
Yogacarabhiimi is based on Nalinaksha Dutt's analysis.*”° Dutt's 
analysis is our "I", and the edition that follows it is "E". Some of the 
sections are translated and/or discussed elsewhere--where such are 
available they have been identified and used in preparing the 
following summary. 


Section One: Aids 
Part One: Lineage*”’ 


E1-7; T8-9) There are ten kinds of factors constituting the 
Bodhisattva's path: his receptacle, his characteristic marks, his 
position (householder, monk), his inclination toward liberation, his 
state, his rebirth, his embracing others, the states of his spiritual 
advancement, his conduct and his ultimate end. 

The "receptacle" is the Bodhisattva's own lineage, the arising of 
his awareness along with the factors pertaining to enlightenment; 
these lead him toward acts such as giving, morality, the six 
perfections and enlightenment. 

There are two varieties of Bodhisattvas: those whose senses have 
beginninglessly comprehended the nature of factors, and those who 
have obtained this lineage through habitual practice of the good 
roots. 

The main distinction between a disciple or self-enlightened being 
and a Bodhisattva is that the former two aim at the obstruction of 
defilements while the latter aims in addition at the removal of 
obstructions to the truth. Furthermore, a Bodhisattva has keener 
senses than a disciple or self-enlightened one, attains superior 
understanding, possesses more varied skills, and gains a better 
result. Bodhisattvas are especially competent at the six perfections. 

A Bodhisattva may commit transgressions, for which he is reborn 
in lower states. But his suffering there is less severe than other 
hellish denizens experience, and he maintains the properties of his 
lineage there. Also, because he lacks proper instruction he may 
occasionally deviate from dharma. 


416 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Part Two: The Awareness of Enlightenment 


(E8-14; T9-11) The development of awareness of enlightenment 
is the first and most essential requirement of a person seeking 
recognition as a Bodhisattva, and after such recognition he is 
permitted to take up the career of a Bodhisattva. By "awareness of 
enlightenment" is meant (a) that a Bodhisattva firmly resolves to 
attain realization of the ultimate truth, and (b) that he dedicates his 
life and future lives to the service of others, helping as many 
persons as possible to attain enlightenment. 

Awareness of enlightenment is explained from five standpoints: 
(a) its essential nature, (b) desire for it, (c) its having everything as 
supporting object, (d) its good qualities, and (e) its increase. 

Enlightenment has been explained from four further standpoints: 
(a) admission into the path of a Bodhisattva, (b) its roots, (c) its 
effects, e.g., compassion, and (d) the basis it provides for spiritual 
exercises. 

Awareness of enlightenment may lead to enlightenment without 
reverses or retrogression, or it may not. The kind that doesn't may 
be permanent or temporary. 

There are four kinds of causes of the origin and development of 
the awareness of enlightenment: 

(i) Four subsidiary conditions: (a) miracles shown by the 
Buddha, (b) the Buddha's teachings as recorded in the 
Bodhisattvapitaka, (c) his compassion for suffering beings, (d) the 
occasions for frustration that people experience. 

Gi) Four basic causes: (a) inclusion in the lineage of 
Bodhisattva, (b) the teacher's loving kindness, (c) compassion, (d) 
courage to relieve the distress of all beings. 

(ii) Four powers: (a) one's own powers, (b) the power of 
recruiting others as Bodhisattvas, (c) the power to visualize the 
Buddha, hear his words, associate with good persons and good 
deeds, (d) the power and desire to relieve distress. 


Part Three: Oneself and Others 
(E15-24; T11-13) In this and the following four Parts the training 


of a Bodhisattva is outlined under ten headings: 
(1) One's own purposes should not be pursued 





YOGACARABHUMI 417 


exclusively. A Bodhisattva should develop his own spiritual 
improvement as a means to serve others and not just for his own 
pleasure or profit. 

(2) The purposes of others likewise should not be pursued 
exclusively. Rather a Bodhisattva should seek his own spiritual 
improvement and not neglect it for the needs of others. 

Giving, patience and compassion are examples of virtues 
that serve one's own purposes as well as those of others. 

(3)-(4) One should, then, act in such a way as to produce 
what is fitting and satisfying for both oneself and others. 

(5)-(6) The causes and results of a Bodhisattva's efforts 
affect (a) his actions and karmic results, (b) meritorious causes and 
results, viz. the five perfections of giving, morality, perseverance, 
energy and meditation, (c) the cause of knowledge and the resulting 
knowledge gained thereby. Both the causes and results are applied 
by a Bodhisattva to the good of others with a view to their gaining 
enlightenment. Hence a Bodhisattva should prefer to continue as 
a Bodhisattva and not become a Buddha, in order to render service 
to other beings. 

(7)-(8) The results the Bodhisattva may expect to enjoy 
in his present life and in the lives to come. 

(9)-(10) The accomplishments of ordinary folk in the 
realm of desire--the nature of one's experiences--are, however pure, 
the results of causes and not final. Three kinds of results are, 
however, final--the eradication of impurities, the experience of the 
merit gained by doing good deeds, and the attainment of liberation. 
These are achieved through practice of the eightfold path. 


Part Four: Reality‘”* 


(E25-36; T13-15) There are two ways of comprehending factors: 
as they are by themselves and as they are in their totality. And 
there are four ways of apprehending things: (1) as they are 
ordinarily understood, (2) as they are when understood through 
instruments of knowledge, (3) as purified from obstruction by 
defilements by disciples and self-enlightened beings whose 
contaminants have been destroyed--examples being knowledge of 
the four noble truths, of dependent origination and of no self and 


418 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the aggregates, (4) as purified from obstructions by ignorance, by 
Bodhisattvas who understand the selflessness of factors, the 
indescribability of factors, that factors are only nominal 
designations, constructionfree, suchness, the nondual source. 

The Bodhisattva, resolute about emptiness, remains in samsara to 
thoroughly ripen the factors of realization for himself and others. 
Because of his resolve he does not spend his time thinking about 
momentariness, for if he did he would‘soon grow tired and achieve 
parinirvana. But he is not frightened by liberation either; rather he 
stores up his equipment for it. He does not think about things too 
much, but sees all factors as the same and thus achieves the 
equanimity allowing him to realize by meditation the four sublime 
states, the five higher faculties and to understand ultimate reality. 

How is the inexpressible nature of all factors to be understood? 
By understanding that every term intended to describe factors is 
nominal only, not essentially real and not nothing either. So both 
the view that nominal designations are real as well as the view that 
things don't exist at all are wrong. The latter, nihilist view denies 
designations as well as reality, and the Buddha termed nihilism a 
worse view even than realism. Emptiness should not be construed 
as nothingness; rather, a thing is "empty" in that it is not to be 
identified as having a nature answering to any description of it. That 
is what is meant by its having "suchness" (tathata). 

The indescribability of factors is attested in what the Buddha 
said. Canonical passages are quoted. 

Because suchness is not understood eight sorts of conceptual 
constructions arise to create the insentient universe assumed to 
comprise them. The eight kinds of conceptual constructions or 
"ideas" are as follows: (1) the idea that things have essential 
natures, (2) the idea that there are particulars, (3) the idea that 
there are wholes, (4) the idea of ego, (5) the idea of "mine", (6) the 
idea that there are pleasant things, (7) the idea that there are 
unpleasant things, (8) the idea that there are things neither pleasant 
nor unpleasant. All these involve two aspects: the constructing and 
the object constructed. They are mutually caused and comprise a 
beginningless series. 

Comprehension of conceptual constructions stems from four 
investigations and four kinds of detailed comprehension of specific 
factors. The four investigations concern a thing's names, its 


YOGACARABHUMI 419 


actuality, the designation of its essential nature, and the designation 
of its particularity. The four kinds of detailed comprehension are 
(1) the correct terms for a thing's nature, (2) the inexpressibility of 
a thing's actual nature, (3) the thing's lack of any essential nature, 
and (4) the ching's being perfected and so not really absent--or, to 
put it differently, that it is really without form and yet 
conventionally has form. 

Now a Bodhisattva has detailed comprehension of the four above 
sorts; he understands the eight sorts of conceptual constructions and 
so is not subject to the kind of false construction of objects that 
breeds karma and samsara. This cessation of discursive thought 
constitutes the Bodhisattva'’s Mahayanic final liberation, 
accompanied as it is by complete mastery of supernatural powers 
such as the ability to magically create or transform himself into 
beings, as well as of staying in the world as long as he desires and 
leaving when he desires to. 

Thus the Bodhisattva has five superior benefits: attainment of 
tranquil stations, clear knowledge and vision of all the branches of 
knowledge, not being wearied by his continuing samsara, 
understanding of the speech of Buddhas, and undistracted devotion 
to Mahayana. He practises five kinds of actions in accord with these 
benefits. 


Part Five: Powers 


(E40-54; T15-16) There are five kinds of powers that are gained 
by a Bodhisattva through his efforts: 

1. Noble powers gained through control of one's 
meditations. There are six higher faculties: a number of supernatural 
powers (some thirty or more), knowledge of previous existences, 
divine ear, knowledge of one's future rebirths, knowledge of the 
thoughts of others, and knowledge of the removal of one's own 
contaminants. 

2. The virtuous powers--what is gotten by mastering the 
six perfections of giving, morality, patience, energy, meditation and 
wisdom. 

3. The special powers a Bodhisattva possesses in virtue of 
his having completed all but his last birth--mostly drawn from siitra 


420 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


passages. 

4. The powers the Bodhisattva shares with disciples and 
self-enlightened ones. 

5. The powers that distinguish a Bodhisattva from 
disciples and self-enlightened ones. 


Part Six: Maturation 


(E15-21; T16-17) Five aspects of a Bodhisattva's development: 

1. The nature required for maturation. A Bodhisattva 
possesses the seed for performing good deeds and he proceeds 
naturally to fulfill the duties prescribed for attaining enlightenment; 

2. Disciples fall into four types: (1) disciples, (2) self- 
enlightened ones, (3) Bodhisattvas, (4) others trained by Buddhas. 

3. Differences in progress towards maturation relate to (a) 
one's physique, influence and energy, (2) one's having good roots 
and avoiding bad ones, (3) one's learning and intelligence, (4) one's 
weak, middling or strong capacities. 

4. Thirty-seven methods of development of maturation are 
distinguished. 

5. The qualifications needed for someone to provide 
training are discussed under the headings of his resolve, the purity 
of his thought, his conduct, his determination and his progress 
towards concluson. 


Part Seven: Enlightenment 


(E62-66; T17) Enlightenment is achieved through obstruction of 
the defilements as well as the contents of awareness. Such 
excellences of an enlightened person are explained. There can be 
only one tathdgata in each world (lokadhatu). 


Part Eight: Subsidiary Aspects of Lineage 


(E67-69; T17-20) A Bodhisattva, in addition, (1) Has great 
resolve--firm faith in the Buddhist precepts. 

(2) Masters various sorts of  literature--the 

Bodhisattvapitaka, consisting of passages formed out of the Buddha's 


ot ent annua 


YOGACARABHUMI 421 


sayings; the Hinayana literature; the literature on logic, etymology, 
medicine, various arts and crafts. "Logic" as understood by Asanga 
seems to pertain mainly to the analysis of causal conditions and 
their effects. 

(3) Having mastered the literature the Bodhisattva should 
cultivate its teachings. Cultivation involves the application of peace 
(Samatha) and insight (vipagyana). 

(4) He should understand the mental condition, 
intelligence and inclination of the person he proposes to instruct, 
and then choose the topics he concentrates on with these features 
in mind. 

(5) He should encourage moral behavior in his pupils. 

(6) He should cultivate the four methods of attaining 
popularity: (1) giving, (2) soft speech, (3) participation with others 
in community actions, (4) correcting the endeavors of others to 
worthwhile pursuits. 


Part Nine: Giving 
(E80-94; T20-21) Nine aspects of giving are discussed; (1) the 
very nature of giving, (2) the range of possible gifts is unlimited, (3) 
the hardest to give away are the best gifts, (4) gifts to friends, 
relatives, employees, (5) gifts to saintly persons, (6) giving at any 
place or time, (7) gifts to the needy, (8) giving calculated to provide 
satisfaction in this life and hereafter, (9) gifts without self-interest. 
These nine aspects are now applied in turn to: 
Part Ten: Morality (E95-129; T21) 
Part Eleven: Patience (E130-137; T21) 
Part Twelve: Energy (E138-142; T21)*” 
Part Thirteen: Meditative Trance (E143-145; T21) 
Part Fourteen: Wisdom (E146-148; T21) 


Part Fifteen: Functions (E149-158; T21) 


422 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The four methods of attaining popularity (cf. Chapter 8, (6)) are 
discussed. 


Part Sixteen: Respect, Services, Boundless States 


(E149-170; T21-23) 1. Ten ways to worship the three jewels (the 
Buddha, the dharma and the order). 

2. The services to be performed for "good company’, i.e., 
one's teacher. 

3. The four boundless states--of loving kindness, 
compassion, sympathy and equanimity--are called "boundless" 
because a Bodhisattva should extend his range of each to the whole 
universe without differentiation. 


Part Seventeen: Limbs of Enlightenment 


(E271-292; T23-28) This Chapter analyzes the process by which 
a Bodhisattva realizes the highest truth into sixteen stages: 

1. Shame at improper conduct;. 

2. Firm and steady suppression of impure types of 
awareness; 

3. Lack of fatigue, nondistress; 

4. Knowledge of Buddhist texts; 

5. Understanding of frailties inherent in life, stemming 
from (a) the limited length of a lifetime, (b) human frailties, (c) 
impurities that can overcome one, (d) false views, (e) the evils of 
the age in which one lives; 

6. Taking refuge in four methods: (a) following the 
teacher's understanding, not the literal meaning, (b) following logic, 
not authority, (c) following the basic meaning (nitartha), not an 
interpretation (neyartha), (d) following understanding attained by 
spiritual practice, not that gained merely by hearing and thinking; 

7. Discrimination of factors, their meanings, the etymology 
of terms, their perspicuity in distinctions. One should apply 
discrimination to things, sense-organs and objects, the law of 
causation, and to the distinction between proper and improper 
situations; 

8. Accumulation of merit and knowledge; 





YOGACARABHUMI 423 


9. Application of the four methods of (6) to the thirty- 
seven limbs of enlightenment. The understanding of both Hinayana 
and Mahayana should be consulted; 

10-11. Peace and insight, practised from both the 
conventional as well as the highest points of view; 

12. Practising skilful methods by (a) study, (b) persuasion 
of others to do good deeds by transfer of merit, (c) elevating the 
understanding of people about the eight right methods, the middle 
way, the law of causation and the other basic Buddhist themes; 

13. Citing or reciting texts in four ways: by memorizing 
after hearing one for the first time, by understanding its meaning, 
by uttering mantras to relieve the frustrations of others, by learning 
to persevere through mastering the mantras; 

14. Taking the vows to develop the awareness of 
enlightenment, to get a good rebirth, to acquire good factors, to 
perform correct deeds, and the great vows of Buddhahood and 
nirvana; 

15. Concentration on emptiness, aimless concentration, 
signless meditation; 

16. Recollection of dharma in the words of the Buddha. 


Part Eighteen: The Qualities of a Bodhisattva 


(E163-203; T29-32) The duties of a Bodhisattva include 
extraordinary ones such as universal love and forbearance, ordinary 
duties such as foregoing liberation until others are liberated, viewing 
all others as equal, helping everyone, reciprocating the services of 
others, and a variety of other such services. 

This is followed by a list of obligations of a Bodhisattva in groups 
such as: six predicted achievements, three conditions to be fulfilled, 
five indispensable conditions, five generally applicable conditions, 
various kinds of dharma, etc. 


Section Two 
Part One 


(E206-210; 133-34) There are five characteristics of a 
Bodhisattva: sympathy, pleasing speech, energy, openhandedness, 


424 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


and the ability to explain the Buddha's deep meaning. Each of these 
is dealt with under five headings: its nature, its application, who has 
which characteristics, its effects and its place within the perfections. 
Sympathy is included in the perfection of meditation; pleasing 
speech in the perfections of morality and wisdom; energy included 
in the perfections of patience and wisdom; openhandedness 
included in the perfection of giving; and the ability to explain the 
Buddha's deep meaning falls within the perfections of meditation 
and wisdom. 


Part Two 


(E211-214; T34) Four more characteristics of a Bodhisattva: he 
is steadfast, constant and faultless in his perfections; he is skilful in 
his tasks; he is helpful to others; his merit is transferred to other 
tathagatas. 


Part Three 


(E214-216; T35-38) A Bodhisattva is tender to all beings, 
mentally disposed to fifteen kinds of worthwhile actions, and 
capable of carrying them out. 


Part Four*” 


(E217-244; T35-38) This Part deals with twelve stages on the 
way to realization. (1) One is born into a lineage of Bodhisattvas 
(i.e., as a Mahayanist). (2) He resolves to become a tathagata. (3) 
He develops the pure intention to attain realization. (4) He begins 
to practise the moral precepts. (5) He practises meditation through 
the various stages up to the attainment of the higher faculties. (6) 
He completes the thirty-seven limbs of enlightenment. (7) He 
realizes the four truths and his misconceptions about ordinary things 
are removed. (8) He comprehends dependent origination, comes to 
understand the sameness of everything, comprehends emptiness, 
signlessness, aimlessness. (9) He rises above the stages of disciple 
and self-enlightened ones and completes the perfections without 
attachment to signs, but still experiences the results of those actions. 
(10) He appreciates the interdependence of all things, their 


yOGACARABHUMI 425 


indescribability and sameness, so that all misunderstandings are 
ended. (11) He teaches the dharma to others. (12) He becomes 
omniscient. 


Section Three: Accomplishment 
Part One 


(E247-248; T39) The third Section summarizes the attainments, 
powers and functions of a Bodhisattva in the twelfth stage of the 
previous paragraph. This Part details five ways in which the 
Bodhisattva is reborn in order to provide service. (1) He may be 
reborn in roles where he can ward off famine, disease, wars, 
tyranny, etc. (2) He may be reborn to help others turn to better 
paths. (3) He may be reborn in a noble family, so that in that role 
he can provide more help to others. (4) He may be reborn in any of 
the stages. (5) He may be reborn as a King or minister to attain true 
enlightenment. 


Part Two 

(E249-252; T40) The Bodhisattva relates to others by developing 
awareness of enlightenment and sympathy with everyone, as head 
of a household caring for his family, friends and servants, by guiding 
his fellows along the right path whatever their level of ability. 

Part Three.*”* 

(E253-255; T40-41) The object of this Part is to show the 
relationship between the bhiimis of the 83.Dasabhtimikasastra and 
the stages discussed in Part Four of the previous Section. 


Part Four 


(E256-258; T41-42) The conduct of a Bodhisattva is reviewed 
under headings that have already been discussed. 


426 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
Part Five 


(E259-264; T42) The object of this Chapter is to describe all the 
major and minor signs of a great man along with a description of 
the merits by which he acquires those signs. 


Part Six 


(E265-282; T42-46) Four kinds of purity of a Buddha: he can 
choose the plane of his last existence and his final time of 
departure, this awareness is purified and he has complete and 
altogether accurate knowledge. 

Again, ten powers: knowledge of the difference between good 
and bad and their causes, of karmic maturations, of various 
meditations, both Hinayana and Mahayana, of others’ senses of 
different realms, of others' intentions, of others' mental states, of the 
previous lives of all beings, of the time of death and birth of all 
beings, and of the destruction of impurities. These are explained 
again in terms of four aspects: their nature, differences, effectiveness 
in gaining liberation, and their being the same for all tathagatas. 

Other extraordinary powers attributed to Buddhas: freedom from 
fear, three kinds of mindfulness, the ability to confront various sorts 
of audiences, lack of any need to guard oneself from wrong moves, 
infinite compassion, appropriate actions because of infallible 
memory, freedom from all dispositions occasioned by traces, and 
omniscience. 


CHAPTERS SIXTEEN AND SEVENTEEN: 
Sopadhika and Nirupadhika 


These Chapters are not available in Sanskrit. 


VOLUME TWO: Viniscayasamgrahant 


This and the remaining Volumes provide added discussions on 
the material in the first Volume, and this Volume is arranged in 
accordance with the sections of Volume One. Sections of Volume 
Two are studied by Lambert Schmithausen.*” Schmithausen's 


YOGACARABHUMI 427 


discussions specially concern the alayavijfiana: he treats various 
passages without attempting to order them consecutively. 


BOOK ONE: Paficavijfianakayamanobhimiviniscaya 


CHAPTERS ONE AND TWO 
(a) "Proof Portion" 

This section is analyzed into five basic sorts by Schmithausen*””. 
According to his account: 

"Proofs (i) upatta, (vi) kayiko 'anubhavah, (vii) acitte samapatti 
and (viii) cyuti. These proofs are all concerned with what one may 
call the 'somatic' aspect of Glayavijfiana: its function of appropriating 
the body at the moment of conception, of keeping it appropriated, 
as a whole and throughout life, even in unconscious absorption, of 
making its presence in the body felt by corporeal sensations even in 
the absence of tactile sense-perceptions, and of gradually 
abandoning the body at death." 

"Proof (iv) bija. This proof...is not concerned with the 'somatic' 
aspect of Glayavijfiana but with its function as the Seed (bija) of 
ordinary forms of mind, based on the argument that the latter 
cannot be one another's Seed." 

"Proofs (ii) Gdi and (iii) spastatva. These two proofs do not 
prove the existence of Glayavijfiana but rather the fact that several 
vijfidnas can arise simultaneously..." 

"Proof (v) karman. This proof is...not of the existence of 
dlayavijfidna directly but rather of the simultaneity of several 
vijfidnas...it does not, as proofs (ii) and (iii) do, prove the 
simultaneity of several vijfianas by referring to (allegedly) obvious 
cases in the sphere of pravrttivijfianas, but does so rather by 
pointing out the simultaneity of experiential phenomena of which 
some--viz., one (at least largely) continuous perception of the 
surrounding world and of one's corporeal basis--most probably have 
to be directly referred to alayavijriana." 

Another portion of this section, which is also found in 
Sthiramati's Abhidharmasamuccayabhasya, is edited and translated 
by Paul Griffiths.*”* We sumarize here that portion, substituting our 
translations of technical terms as usual where appropriate. Some 
lines of the passage are translated completely. 

"Eight arguments demonstrate the existence of a_ store- 


428 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


consciousness (dlayavijnana). 

"1.The first argument appeals to the impossibility of appropriating 
a new body. It is divided into five sub-sections. Section (i) points 
out that an exhaustive categorization of the causes of the 
pravittivijfidna can be given by listing present or immediately 
preceding events, and that this leaves no place for causation by long 
past events. It is the alaya which provides the locus for, and thus 
accounts for, this second kind of causation...Sections (ii) and (iii) 
state a fundamental presupposition of Buddhist theories about 
karma and causation; that the causal principle which brings about 
the maturation of karmic effect is in itself neutral. Since the six 
‘functioning consciousnesses' are not neutral in this way but consist 
in experience which has both affective and moral tone, Sthiramati 
argues that the Glaya must be postulated in order to allow for the 
maturation of karmic effect which in itself has no moral or affective 
tone...Sub-argument (iv) points out that the appropriation of a new 
physical body at the moment of a new birth would not be possible 
without a vipakavijfiana, a ‘maturation consciousness’ which can 
only be the alaya. This is because the other six consciousnesses 
cannot appropriate the physical body as a whole since each of them 
has its own specific physical basis or locus (visual consciousness is 
located in or based on the eye and so forth). Each one of the six 
pravrttivijfidnani therefore appropriates only its own specific 
physical basis. Something more is required to appropriate the whole 
of the physical body at once, and this, according to the argument, 
can only be the dlaya." 

"2.The second argument is that without the dlayavijfiana there 
could not be simultaneous awarenesses of different things in one 
stream of consciousness. Since such simultaneous awareness 
happens there must be such a store-consciousness." 

"3.Simultaneous awarenesses are required to explain how one can 
have a mental awareness of what one experiences visually, etc." 

"4.Rather than the various kinds of sense-awareness mutually 
seeding each other, the store-consciousness acts as a receptacle for 
all seeds--for all future possibilities of action and sensation--even 
when these seeds have mutually incompatible qualities." 

"5.Since each and every awareness involves at least four factors--a 
receptacle, a physical basis, a subjective aspect and an objective 
aspect, there must be a single locus where all are housed." 


YOGACARABHUMI 429 


"6.To explain the fact that one experiences various things at once 
even when one is thinking correctly, meditating, etc., it is necessary 
to postulate a store-consciousness where all these experiences 
reside." 

"7.Unless there is a store-consciousness the possibility of 
nonaware (acitta) consciousness could not arise, since one's stream 
would have left his body and he would be dead." 

"8.Death, defined as the departure of consciousness from the 
body, requires there being a kind of consciousness which is 
contentless. The only consciousness that satisfies that description is 
the store-consciousness." 


BOOKS SIXTEEN AND SEVENTEEN: Sopadhika- and Nirupadhika- 
Bhimis 


The sections here dealt with are translated into Chinese by 
Hsiiang-tsang (T.1579), by Paramartha (T.1584), and in two other 
versions (T.1828-1829). Part of this section has been translated into 
German from the Tibetan by Lambert Schmithausen‘*”. "T" 
references in the summary given here are to that German 
translation, and our summary is based on the summary 
Schmithausen provides on pp. 22-37, using Ronald Davidson's 
exposition of one section of it (from his dissertation, op. cit.). 


SECTION ONE 


(T41-43) Question: Is one who has attained liberation with 
residues free from all defilements? Answer: Yes, he is. 

Question: Is he free from all frustrations? Answer: He is free from 
all future frustrations, and from all accompanying mental 
frustrations, but he is not necessarily free from bodily existence 

Question: If all perfected beings have attained control of their 
awareness, why do they remain embodied according to their 
appointed length of life (@yuhsamskara), since they are liberated 
and ready for parinirvana? Answer: Some perfected beings are able 
to prolong their life, others are not and are liberated immediately. 

(T43-53)*® Objection: "If the senses of the Arhat remain 
unsuppressed and unchanged from the way they were before his 


430 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


enlightenment, just what is this revolution at the basis whereby 
there is no alteration in the basic pattern of causation? And if there 
is no revolution at the basis, then how does he possess the ability to 
turn back the defilements and enter the path when the states of 
"before" and "after" enlightenment are the same? 

Answer: It is impossible to state definitely whether or not 
revolution at the basis is the same or different from the 
senses...Revolution at the basis is constituted by the purity of 
thusness; it is possessed of the lineage of thusness; it has the seed 
of thusness; finally, it has come into being from thusness. Since it 
is impossible to definitely state whether thusness is the same as or 
different from the senses, these conditions also apply. to revolution 
at the basis. For example, suppose a butcher should kill a cow. 
Then, having taken out all the entrails, meat, bones, and ligaments, 
he should chop, beat, and slice them up. Finally, he wears the hide 
of the unfortunate beast as a garment. Now it should be understood 
that the cow is neither possessed nor nonpossessed of his hide. In 
the same way, the Arhat whose basis has been revolutionized has 
cut down all the fetters, the bonds, the proclivities, the afflictions, 
and the envelopers with the sword of wisdom. He cannot be said to 
have possession or nonpossession of the six senses which are like the 
hide of the cow for him. 

Now the fundamental transformation which is associated with 
liberation with residues is connected with the six senses, while that 
associated with liberation without residues is disconnected from the 
senses. How is the latter possible? Since it is not developed from the 
causal nexus of the six senses but is generated through the 
cultivation on the path which has its objective support in thusness, 
it does not require either the presence or the absence of the senses. 
It cannot further transform or be spoiled. It should be understood 
to be existent, having the characteristics of unmanifoldness 
(nisprapaficatva) and the purity of the factor element. Furthermore, 
both kinds of fundamental transformation can be said to exist 
because of its imperturbableness, and based on_ that 
imperturbableness there cannot be postulated either priority or 
posteriority. Certainly this dharma is not born, arisen, or stabilized. 
Like water it is clarity; like gold it is goodness; like the sky ir is 
separated from clouds and haze; thus it may be said to exist. It is 
permanent since it is constituted by the purity of thusness. It is 


YOGACARABHUMI 431 


blissful but only by means of the satisfaction of the highest stage, 
not the bliss of feeling, since it is entirely separated from the 
defilements and their resultant suffering." 

(T53-59) Revolution at the basis is eternal, since it constitutes 
purification of suchness. It is satisfying, since it goes beyond the 
frustrations born of the defilements, but not satisfying, since it 
involves feelings. One who attains liberation without remainder no 
longer experiences purposive distinctions. 

Question: Isn't there a difference between a liberated Sravaka and 
a Tathagata, since the former still has obstructions while the latter 
doesn't? Answer: There are two kinds of liberation with remainder: 
it may be either with or without obstructions. In the former all signs 
and depravities are completely blocked off and have ceased. 

Question: So why isn't the perfected being (who is a Sravaka) a 
Buddha? Answer: Because he has not cultivated meditation and 
because a perfected being may not have the intention to elevate 
himself to liberation. 

Question: Is remainderless liberation bodily or not? Answer: 
Neither, since to say it is not suggests it is something else, and in 
fact it is nothing! 

Question: Does one in remainderless liberation attain mastery 
over his body, and is that his aim? Answer: Yes, he does attain 
mastery, but while the Tathagata has that as his aim, the Sravaka 
doesn't. 


A passage occurring later in this Volume has been translated by 
Davidson,** who calls it an "extraordinarily important section of the 
Viniscayasamgrahani". Here are portions: 


"It may be asked: what is the establishment of the reversal of the 
general defilements? Briefly, the underlying consciousness is the 
root of all of these defilements. In this way it is the root of the 
accomplishment of beings' conditioned existence since it generates 
the sensory organs, their physical bases, and the sensory 
consciousnesses. It is also the root of the accomplishment of the 
physical world since it generates that world...Thus it is the root of 
all the general difficulties." 

"Now that underlying consciousness which has seized the seeds 
of the roots of goodness conducive to liberation and to penetration 


432 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of the roots of goodness conducive to liberation and to penetration 
is not the cause of the origin of suffering...When these arise, the 
worldly roots of goodness, which are different from them, for the 
most part become clear light...(T)he underlying consciousness, 
which...is the root of all the general defilements, should be 
understood to be tured around by cultivating the wholesome 
qualities. Practice, for the sake of stabilizing the mind of the 
ordinary being or for the cultivation of the wholesome dharmas, is 
by means of mental application which focuses on the sensory 
consciousnesses. First one cultivates that for the sake of entering 
into the comprehension of the truths. If one does not obtain the eye 
which focuses on the truths which have not yet been seen, then he 
will be unable to comprehend the underlying consciousness which 
is the residence of all seeds...To comprehend the elemental realm of 
all elements is to comprehend also the underlying consciousness. All 
the various defilements are to been as collected there.".. 

"Since the underlying consciousness is the sphere for all that 
brings together the manifestations of the various formations, having 
collected, piled, assessed, and accumulated all of these into the 
underlying consciousness, because of service and meditation through 
the gnosis which focuses on thusness, the yogin transforms the 
fundament. Immediately after this fundamental transformation, it is 
said that the underlying consciousness is eliminated. Because it is 
eliminated, all the general defilements are also said to be 
eliminated. The fundament of that underlying consciousness is 
understood as changed by the antidotes and the enemies." 

"The underlying consciousness is impermanent and appropriating. 
Fundamental transformation is permanent and nonappropriating, 
since it has been changed by the path focusing on thusness. The 
underlying consciousness is endowed with hindrances while 
fundamental transformation is permanently separated from them. 
The underlying consciousness is the cause for the operation of the 
defilements and not the cause of the operation of the path: 
fundamental transformation is the opposite of these and is the cause 
of stability but not of arising." 

"Now immediately after the characteristic of eliminating the 
underlying consciousness, there is the elimination of both forms of 
appropriate and [the attainment of] the ability to place the body 
anywhere like a magical form. Since the cause of the arising of 


YOGACARABHUMI 433 


future suffering has been eliminated, there is the elimination of the 
appropriation [of a further body] arising in the future. Since there 
has been the elimination of all the general difficulties in this life, 
there is the elimination of all the subtle hindrances of the general 
defilements in this life. There being separation from all of these 


hindrances, there ouly remains those which are the conditions of 
life." 





VOLUME THREE: Vastusamgrahani 
VOLUME FOUR: Paryayasamgraha 
VOLUME FIVE: Vivaranasamgrahani 


Information on these three Volumes is to be found in 
Schmithausen, op. cit., by consulting the Index references to pages 
in the Chinese and Tibetan editions. Wayman renders a number of 
passages from these sections.*® 


167. ASANGA, *Aryadesanavikhyapanasastra and Bhasya‘® 


"In the Chinese translation of Hsiian-tsang, the text consists of 
eleven chapters, which follow the uddana found at the beginning of 
the verse text. The eleven chapter titles are: 1.vastusamgraha, 25 
verses; 2.*visuddharthasamgraha, 21 verses; 3.*kauSalasiddhi, 25 
verses; 4.*anityasiddhi, 23 verses; 5.*duhkhasiddhi, 20 verses; 
6.*$tinyatasiddhi, 23 verses; 7.*nihsvabhdva, 24 verses; 
8.*abhisamayasiddhi, 25 verses; 9.*yogasiddhi, 4 verses; 
10.*acintyasiddhi, 10 verses; and 11.*visistaviniscayasamgraha, 47 
verses." 

Section VII.19-21 of this text is translated in Davidson, op. cit., 
pp. 229-230. 


434 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
168.ASANGA, Abhidharmasamuccaya 
Summary by Paul J. Griffiths 


Editions. A single incomplete manuscript of the Sanskrit original 
was discovered by Rahula Sankrtyayana in 1936 during his second 
journey into Tibet in search of Buddhist texts. Thorough 
descriptions of this manuscript have been given by Prahlad 
Pradhan“ and V.V.Gokhale*’ from which it emerges that about 
40% of the text is preserved in this palm-leaf Magadhi manuscript. 
An edition of these fragments was published by V.V.Gokhale in 
194788, This is still the most careful and useful edition of the 
Sanskrit text. An edition/reconstruction of the entire text was 
published three years later by Prahlad Pradhan.*®? This was partly 
based on the sole manuscript, partly upon quotations from the text 
in Sthiramati's Abhidharmasamuccayabhasya and other texts extant 
in Sanskrit, but largely dependent upon reconstruction from the 
Tibetan and Chinese translations for the missing 60% of the text. 
Pradhan's edition/reconstruction is often helpful but must be used 
with extreme caution for those sections of the work which are not 
extant in Sanskrit. 

Translations. (i) Tibetan: The entire work was translated into 
Tibetan by Jinamitra, Silendrabodhi and Ye Shes Sde (Tohoku 
#4049, D Sems-Tsam RI 44b1-120a7; Peking #5550, P Sems-Tsam 
LI 51a2-141b2). The translation is, as far as can be judged, largely 
faithful and accurate, and will be the primary reference in what 
follows for those sections which have no Sanskrit original. (ii) 
Chinese: There is a complete translation into Chinese by Hsuan 
Tsang (Taisho #1605, Vol. 31, 663a1-694b10) which, while it 
substantially follows the Sanskrit, contains some sections not present 
in the original. (iii) French: A complete French translation of this 
work, made by Walpola Rahula, was published in 1971** (174.2.8). 
This translation appears to be based exclusively upon Pradhan's 
edition/reconstruction, and therefore shares with that work some 
errors and dubious reconstructions.*”* 


Form and Influences: The Abhidharmasamuccaya consists in a 
very concise series of definitions of key technical terms as these 
were understood by a leading scholastic thinker of Indian Yogacara. 


ABHIDHARMASAMUCCAYA 435 


There are very few extended philosophical discussions since the text 
only occasionally extends itself beyond schematic outlines and brief 
definitions; a summary can be little more than a skeletal framework, 
a list of the headings and sub-headings by which Asanga organized 
his material. The major interest of the text lies in the fact that it is 
one of the few instances available to us of a Mahayana Abhidharma 
text; it therefore provides a systematic presentation of the major 
philosophical categories of Indian Buddhism as these were 
understood in one Mahayana school, one which gives some 
fascinating contrasts with this text's Theravada and Vaibhasika 
analogues.*” 

The colophon of the Sanskrit manuscript of the 
Abhidharmasamuccayabhasya tells us that the 
Abhidharmasamuccaya consists of five chapters; the fivefold division 
is found also in the Tibetan translation, and will be used for this 
summary. The Chinese translation gives an eightfold division rather 
than a fivefold one, but this means only that Hsiian Tsang divides 
the first chapter of the Sanskrit text into four, which, added to the 
final four chapters, give eight chapters altogether. It is almost 
certain that the fivefold division was original. 

The abbreviations used are: G = Gokhale's edition of the Sanskrit 

fragments; this reference is given first when the Sanskrit exists for 
the section under consideration. 
P = the Peking edition of the Tibetan Tripitaka; reference are to 
folio and line of Volume LI of the Sems-Tsam section. D = the 
Derge edition of the Tibetan Tripitaka; references are to folio and 
line of Volume RI of the Sems-Tsam section. Pr = Pradhan's 
edition/reconstruction of the Sanskrit section. Not all sections will 
be commented on in the summary that follows, since the contents 
of the Abhidharmasamuccaya are often exhausted simply by giving 
a section-heading. 


A. COMPENDIUM OF CHARACTERISTICS 


Al Salutation (P51a3-5; D44b1-3; Pr1.2-5) 

A2 Summary verse (P51a3-5; D44b1-3; Pr1.2-5) 

A3 Enumeration of elements, aggregates and senses (P51a5-51b3; 
D44b3-7; Pr1.6-12) 

A4 Why there are five aggregates, eighteen elements and twelve 


436 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


senses (P51b3-52a1; D44b7-45a5; Pr1.13-2.10) 

AS Characteristics of the aggregates, elements and senses (P52a1- 
53al1; D45a5-46a3; Pr2.11-3.11) 

A6 Arrangement of aggregates, elements and senses (G15.1-19.22 
(incomplete); P53a2-65a4; D46a3-56a5; Pr3.12-15.18) 

A6.1 Arrangement of the aggregate of matter: classified 
according to the four great elements (earth, water, fire and air) and 
those things derived from them. 

A6.2 Arrangement of the aggregate of feeling: classified 
according to the six senses which produce sensations (eye, ear, nose, 
tongue, body, mind), and according to the range of possible 
affective tones. 

A6.3 Arrangement of the aggregate of conceptual 
identifications, classified according to the six senses from which they 
originate and according to the psycho-cosmic realms to which they 
pertain. 

A6.4 Arrangement of the aggregate of conditioning 
factors: Asanga's definition of this group centers around the concept 
of volition and includes lists and definitions of the 53 Yogacarin 
accompanying factors, mental states ranging from volition itself to 
sustained thought. Special attention is given to the five kinds of 
view: the text briefly lists the five errors involved in belief in a self, 
and the twenty forms of wrong view concerning the self and the 
aggregates. There is also a complex subdivision of the concept of 
distraction according to its types. 

Also included here are brief definitions of the twenty-three 
Yogacara factors dissociated from awareness. 

A6.5 Arrangement of the aggregate of consciousness. A 
more obvious Yogacara thrust is apparent in the analysis of the 
aggregate of consciousness in which the key terms "awareness", 
"mind" and "consciousness" are distinguished and defined. 
Awareness is identified with the Yogacara store-consciousness which 
holds all the karmic seeds produced by the actions of the other 
aggregates. The mind, in contrast, is identified with the supporting 
object of the store-consciousness, and is always more or less defiled, 
connected with incorrect ideas about personal identity. Finally, the 
term "consciousness" is identified simply as the standard six sense- 
consciousnesses. 


ABHIDHARMASAMUCCAYA 437 


A6.6 Arrangement of the elements: The list and 
definitions of the unconditioned elements, provided as part of the 
text's analysis of the element of factors, is greatly augmented when 
compared with those of the Vaibhasika and Theravada schools. The 
Vaibhasikas recognize only three unconditioned elements and the 
Theravadins apply the term only to nirvana. In this text we find 
eight unconditioned elements: (1) the true nature of good qualities, 
(2) the true nature of bad qualities, (3) the true nature of neutral 
qualities, (4) space, (5) uncalculated cessation, (6) calculated 
cessation, (7) the unchangeable, (8) the cessation of identification 
and perception. 

A6.7 Arrangement of the senses. This section concludes 
with a discussion of some miscellaneous questions about the 
relationships between aggregates, elements and senses, and with 
quasi-etymological discussions of the meanings of the terms. 

A7 Division of the aspects of the aggregates, elements and senses 
(G19.23-29.15 (incomplete); P64b4-82b5; D56a5-70a6; Pr15.19- 
32.20) In this lengthy section the aggregates, elements and senses 
are further analyzed using a threefold question-and-answer method. 
First, a category is stated - for example, the category of that which 
is dependently originated - and then three questions are asked: 
"What (among the aggregates, elements and senses) exists as 
dependently originated?" "How many (of the aggregates, elements 
and senses) exist as dependently originated?" "With what purpose 
does one examine (those aggregates, elements and senses) which 
exist as dependently originated?" The answer to the first question 
usually takes the form of a definition of the category under 
consideration; the answer to the second question consists of an 
enumeration of the aggregates, elements and senses which meet this 
definition; and the answer to the third question outlines the benefits 
gained from analyzing the aggregates, elements and senses by way 
of the category under consideration. Clearly, this is an open-ended 
method of analysis and the text applies some sixty categories in this 
manner before concluding that "the method of division using this 
approach is limitless." The list below outlines the categories applied 
in this manner. 

A7.1 Real existence 

A7.2 Existence as designation 

A7.3 Nominal truth 


438 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


A7.4 Highest truth 

A7.5 Object of knowledge/distinct object of 
knowledge/transcendent object of knowledge 

A7.6 Material/immaterial 

A7.7 Visible/invisible 

A7.8 Resistant/nonresistant 

A7.9 Impure/pure 

A7.10 Harmful/not harmful 

A7.11 Fleshly/nonfleshly 

A7.12 Based upon desire/based upon renunciation 

A7.13 Conditioned/unconditioned 

A7.14 Mundane/supramundane 

A7.15 Originated/not originated: here twenty-four further 
subdivisions of ways of being originated are given. 

A7.16 Grasper/grasped 

A7.17 External/internal 

A7.18 Defiled/undefiled 

A7.19 Past/future/present 

A7.20 Good/bad/neutral 

A7.21 Connected with desire/connected with 
matter/connected with immateriality: here the text expounds the 
ten kinds of nonattachment. 

A7.22  Training/nontraining/neither training nor 
nontraining 

A7.23 To be abandoned by vision/to be abandoned by 
(meditative) development/not to be abandoned 

A7.24 Dependently originated. The text here provides the 
usual twelvefold list of the elements comprising the cycle of 
dependent origination, and then further classifies them in a number 
of different ways, notable among them being the division into those 
factors which ‘project’ (@ksepanga - namely, ignorance, conditioning 
factors and consciousness); those which are ‘projected’ (aksiptanga - 

namely name-and-form, the six senses, contact and sensation); 

those which 'produce' (abhinirvartanga - namely, thirst, grasping 
and becoming); and those which are 'produced' (abhinivrttanga) - 
namely birth and old age/death. 

The Abhidharmasamuccaya also provides here a version 
of the catuskoti, the tetralemma or four-cornered negation, relating 
to the twelvefold cycle of dependent origination: "(The cycle of 





ABHIDHARMASAMUCCAYA 439 


dependent origination) does not arise from itself, nor from 
something else, nor from both (itself and something else), nor from 
its own action, from the action of something else, nor without 
cause." 

A7.25 Condition: the text here applies the category of 
condition using the standard question-and-answer method; the 
standard fourfold system of conditions which is found also in the 
major abhidharma texts of other schools is also used here. The 
definition of the causal condition as "the storehouse consciousness 
and good proclivities" is interesting, showing once again the central 
causal importance of the storehouse consciousness in Yogacara 
metaphysics. 

A7.26 Homogeneous and homogeneous with that 

A7.27 Grasped 

A7.28 Senses 

A7.29 Frustration that consists in frustration/frustration 
that consists in transformation/frustration that consists in being 
conditioned 

A7.30 Possessing maturation 

A7.31 Nourishment 

A7.32 Inferior/superior 

A7.33 Summary statement on the various methods of 
classifying the aggregates, elements and senses. 

A8 An elevenfold analysis of the concept of inclusion (P82b5- 
84b2; D70a6-71b5; Pr32.5-33.16) Here we have an outline account 
of the different ways in which the aggregates, elements and senses 
can be grouped together. 

AQ A sixfold analysis of the concept of connection (G29.16-26 
(incomplete); P84b2-85b4; D71b5-72b4; Pr33.19-35.2) 

A10 A threefold analysis of the concept of concomitance (G29.27- 
30; P85b4-86b3; D72b4-73a7; Pr35.2-22) 


B. ANALYSIS OF THE TRUTHS 


B1 Four kinds of analysis (G30.17-18; P86b3-4; D73a7-73b1; 
Pr36.1-2) Here are listed the four kinds of analysis - of the truths, 
of doctrine, of obtaining and of debate - which will be analysed in 
the last four chapters of the text. 

B2 The truth of frustration (G30.19-31.31 (incomplete); P86b4- 


440 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


92b8; D83n1-78b1; Pr36.3-43.8) B2.1 The reference of the term 
"truth of frustration": The text states that the term refers to the 
entire universe, both animate and inanimate, insofar as this is 
produced by the defiled actions of sentient beings. The text gives in 
passing an outline of the standard Indian Buddhist cosmology, based 
upon the division between the sentient universe and insentient 
universe. 

B2.2 Divisions of the concept of frustration: An eightfold 
division, a sixfold division, a threefold division, and, finally, a 
twofold division: suffering according to conventional truth and 
suffering according to highest truth. 

B2.3 The defining characteristic of the concept of 
frustration: a list and definitions of the four general characteristics 
of frustration. The first is momentariness, which is further analyzed 
into twelve subdivisions, applying the concept to all aspects of the 
animate and inanimate world. The second is frustration itself. The 
third is emptiness, which is expounded in a manner quite different 
from that of the Madhyamaka thinkers: it is defined as perceiving 
the nonexistence of a particular thing in a particular location. 
Further, to perceive in this way is to perceive things as they really 
are. The example given of perceiving the nonexistence of a 
particular thing in a particular location is perceiving the 
nonexistence of a permanent self among the aggregates, elements 
and senses. Further, Asaiga distinguishes three kinds of emptiness 
which relate to the three essential natures which are so central to 
Yogacara thought. The three are: emptiness of essential nature, 
which is equated with constructed nature; emptiness which consists 
in nonexistence in any particular manner, which is equated with 
dependent existence; and finally, natural emptiness, which is 
equated with perfected nature. The fourth general characteristic of 
frustration is that of non-self. 

B2.4 The nature of impermanence and momentariness 

B2.5 The constituents of matter 

B2.6 An eightfold classification of frustrations relating to 
various classes of beings who are born in different psycho-cosmic 
spheres, 

B2.7 Death considered as an example of frustration: 
different types of death relating to various classes of individual are 
distinguished. 


one. 


ABHIDHARMASAMUCCAYA 441 


B3 The truth of origin (G32.1-9 (incomplete); P92b8-107b4; 
D78b1-90b2; Pr43.10-62.3) 

B3.1 Definitions of the truth of origin. This consists in 
defilements and action dominated by passion, and is centrally 
concerned with the operation of thirst, the passionate and greedy 
desire for specific things. 

B3.2 Defilements explained under ten headings: 

B3.2.1 Enumeration: the standard six- and 
tenfold enumerations of defilement. 

B3.2.2 Defining characteristic: defilement is 
defined as anything which disturbs the tranquillity of body or mind. 

B3.2.3 Arising: defilements arise when the 
latent tendencies for them to do so are present, and an object with 
the capacity to engender them is at hand. 

B3.2.4 Object: this section relates to the 
objects of specific defilements to the psycho-cosmic spheres in which 
practitioners find themselves. 

B3.2.5 Connection; enumerates the possible 
combinations of different defilements. 

B3.2.6 Synonyms: a lengthy exposition of the 
twenty-four major synonyms of the term "klesa" and their different 
connotations. 

B3.2.7 Obstructing activity; enumerates the 
obstructive functions of specific defilements. 

B3.2.8 Realm: enumerates the psycho-cosmic 
realms in which each of the six (or ten) defilements operates. 

B3.2.9 Group: divides the defilements into 
those which can be abandoned by vision and those which can be 
abandoned by meditative cultivation. 

B3.2.10 Abandonment: discussion of the three 
kinds of abandonment of the defilements, that by analysis, by 
attention and by obtaining. 

B3.3 Action dominated by defilement. The detailed 
analysis of defilements is then followed by an equally detailed 
analysis of action dominated by defilement and also of the types of 
action and their effects in general. There is no easily discernible 
scheme of organisation to this section: the treatment of karma 
begins with the standard definition of action as consisting in volition 
and that which occurs subsequent to volition, and then passes into 


442 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


a long series of siitra quotations mentioning different classifications 
of action. 

B4 The truth of cessation (P107b4-109b8; D90b2-92b1; Pr62.5- 
65.9) A brief analysis of the truth of cessation, considering it from 
twelve perspectives: 

B4.1 According to defining characteristic, 

B4.2 According to profundity, 

B4.3 According to convention, 

B4.4 According to ultimacy, 

B4.5 According to incompleteness, 

B4.6 According to completeness, 

B4.7 According to absence of ornament, 

B4.8 According to possession of ornament, 

B4.9 According to possession of residue, 

B4.10 According to absence of residue, 

B4.11 According to supreme state, 

B4.12 According to synonyms: this last section is by far 
the longest and contains a systematic analysis of all the major 
synonyms of "cessation" (nirodha), together with significant 
associated concepts. 

BS The truth of path (G32.10-34.20 (incomplete); P109b8-119b8; 
D92b1-100b7; Pr65.11-77.21) The Abhidharmasamuccaya uses the 
standard fivefold division of the path in order to expound the fourth 
truth. 

BS.1 Definition and subdivisions of the path. 

B5.2 The path of preparation, comprising the practice of 
morality, and with some preliminary meditative practises. 

B5.3 The path of application, which comprises further 
preliminary meditational practices (especially the aids to 
penetration) and leads the practitioner to the highest stage of the 
mundane path. 

B5.4 The path of vision, defined in characteristically 
Yogacara terms as consisting in the realization of the similarity of 
subject and object, and as a knowledge which perceives objects 
without using conventional designations. The standard framework 
of eight patiences and eight knowledges is used to subdivide the 
path of vision. 

BS.S The path of cultivation: 

B5.5.1 The mundane path of cultivation, defined 


ABHIDHARMASAMUCCAYA 443 


as the four mundane meditations and the four formless states. Each 
of these meditative states is in turn given detailed analysis. This part 
of the path has essentially to do with the development of altered 
states of consciousness of various kinds, and is seen as a preparation 
for the transcendent path. 

BS.5.2 The transcendent path of cultivation, 
defined as the eight kinds of knowledge pertaining to the four truths 
(two for each truth) and the related concentrative states up to the 
third of the four immaterial states. Here, and in the following 
subdivisions of the path of cultivation, the text describes the re- 
presentation to the mind of the practitioner of the knowledge 
gained during the practice of the path of vision. 

BS.5.3 The weak, powerful and intermediate paths, 
defined according to the types of passion that are abandoned by 
relative intensities of practice. 

B5.5.4 The paths of application, immediate 
succession, liberation and distinction; further subdivisions of the 
path of cultivation. 

BS.5.5 The methods of cultivating the path and the 
four antidotes. 

BS.5.6 An elevenfold division of the path, 
including the thirty-seven qualities which aid enlightenment, each 
of which is given detailed analysis of its own. 

B5.6 The final path, the conclusion of the meditative path, 
consisting essentially in the removal of all negative qualities in the 
mind of the practitioner and the attainment of final enlightenment. 

BS.6.1 The twenty-four types of depravity removed 
by the final path. 

BS.6.2 The concentration which is like a 
thunderbolt: an unshakeable condition of mental stability resulting 
from the destruction of negative mental qualities. 

B5.6.3 The continuous revolution at the basis, a 
basic alteration in the cognitive and perceptual structures of the 
practitioner as a result of the practice of the path. 

B5.6.4 The knowledge of destruction and the 
knowledge of nonarising, referring to the knowledge on the part of 
the practitioner that the cycle of karmic cause and effect has been 
broken. 

B5.6.5 The qualities of the adept: a listing of the 


444 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


ten qualities of the adept who has practised the path to its 
conclusion. 

BS.7 Summary statement of the four modes of the path 
and the sixteen aspects of the four truths which comprise the 
framework of the entire path. 


C.ANALYSIS OF DHARMA! 


C1 Divisions of the canonical literature (P1 19b8-121a5; D100b7- 
102a3; Pr78.1-80.4) The twelve types of canonical literature are set 
forth, defined, and related to the other standard three- and twofold 
divisions of the canon - into siitra, vinaya and abhidharma, and into 
the scriptures belonging to the disciples and those belonging to the 
Bodhisattvas. 

C2 Dharma considered as the object of mental activity (P121a6- 
122a6; D102a4-103a3; Pr80.4-81.14). A list of, and definitions of, 
a number of categories which illustrate and explain the ways in 
which dharma, and the texts which enshrine it, can become the 
object of the practitioner's thought: 

C2.1 As an object capable of being pervaded, 

C2.2 As an object productive of purification of conduct, 

C2.3 As an object productive of skill, especially in the 
understanding and handling of key Buddhist doctrinal concepts, 

C2.4 As an object productive of purification of passion. 

C3 Reasons, methods and results of studying dharma (G34.21-29 

(incomplete); P121a6-123b6; D103a3-104a7; Pr81.15-83.130). 
C3.1 Four reasons for studying dharma 
C3.2 Four methods of studying dharma 
C3.3 Four types of exact knowledge of dharma 





1.There is a substantial ambiguity throughout this section - as 
indeed throughout so much of Buddhist philosophical literature - 
in the meaning of the term "dharma". Most often it refers here to 
the texts through which the doctrine is expressed; but sometimes 
it refers to the doctrine as abstracted from any given text, and 
sometimes even to the nature of things, a category which 
abolishes the fact/value distinction. I have therefore left the term 
untranslated throughout the summary of this section. 


ABHIDHARMASAMUCCAYA 445 


C3.4 Five stages of spiritual practice belonging to one who 
studies dharma in a concentrated manner: 

C3.4.1 Dharma considered as an aid. Here the 
stress is on intellectual understanding of dharma considered as 
textually-expressed doctrine. 

C3.4.2 Dharma considered as a basis for 
application. Here the practitioner applies his faculty of attention to 
the intellectual understanding gained in the preceding stage. 

C3.4.3 Dharma considered as a mirror. Here the 
practitioner attains a stage of concentration which, while based on 
intellectual understanding, reflects it signlessly. 

C3.4.4 Dharma considered as radiance, the 
knowledge attained by the practitioner when he has passed beyond 
the duality of subject and object. Here everything is considered as 
awareness, a characteristic Yogacara emphasis. 

C3.4.5 Dharma considered as _ basis: the 
transformation of the basis. 

C4 on the meaning of vaipulya (G35.1-4; P123b6-124a1; D104a7- 
104b2; Pr83.14-20). The exact sense of the term vaipulya remains 
obscure. It may simply be an inclusive term for all Buddhist 
scriptures, including the Mahayana sutras: The 
Abhidharmasamuccaya devotes a great deal of discussion to it, and 
to the benefits of studying the literature denoted by it. As part of 
this discussion there is a long analysis of the scope and goals of the 
practice of the perfections. 

CS Twenty-eight wrong views of Mahayana doctrine (G35.5-14; 
P124a1-124b1; D104b2-105a2; Pr83.20-84.10) 

C6 The implications and indirect intentions of doctrinal formulae 
(G35.15-24; P124b2-125a1; D195a2-7; Pr84.11-85.2). A list of the 
four types of indirect intention and the four types of purport, 
applying the hermeneutical models outlined therein to some specific 
doctrinal formulae. The general idea is that some doctrinal formulae 
contain indirect intentions and purport which are not prima facie 
obvious. These categories are an attempt to systematically describe 
some of the methods by which such purport and indirect intentions 
can be arrived at. 

C7 Criteria for recognizing competence in meditative practice 
related to dharma (G35.25-32; P125a1-6; D105a7-105b3; Pr85.3- 
12) 


446 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
D. ANALYSIS OF OBTAINING 


D1 Classification of individuals (G36.1-37.4 (incomplete); 
P125a36-130b8; D105b3-110b2; Pr 85.16-92.19). An exhaustive 
listing of the types of person to be found in the world. 

D1.1 Sevenfold divsion according to conduct: those whose 
conduct is dominated by attachment, hatred, delusion, pride, 
conceptual thought, equilibrium, and dull passion. 

D1.2 Threefold division according to deliverance. Those 
who belong to the disciples’ vehicle, the self-enlighteneds' vehicle, 
and the great vehicle. Here we find the standard Mahayana polemic 
against those disciples who aim at only their own enlightenment 
and not that of all beings. 

D1.3 Threefold division according to receptacle: those 
whose future births are not yet defined by their accumulation of 
spiritual attainments, those for whom there is only a limited number 
of births to come, and those who will have no more births. 

D1.4 Twofold division according to application: those who 
follow confidence - which means that they rely on doctrine as 
taught by others - and those who follow doctrine, which means that 
they rely on doctrine as discovered by themselves. 

D1.5 Twenty-sevenfold division according to result, 
ranging from one who is devoted: to the practice of confidence to 
the noble person whose nature is unshakeable. 

D1.6 Sixfold division according to realm: the ordinary 
man, the person undergoing training, the person beyond training, 
the Bodhisattva, the liberated-for-himself and the tathagata - all 
discussed according to the psycho-cosmic realms they inhabit. 

D1.7 Fivefold division according to career: five different 
types of Bodhisattva. 

D2 Classification of realization (G37.5-38.21 (incomplete); 
P130b88-138a7; D110b2-117a6; Pr92.20-102.15). A systematic 
classification of the different types of realization. 

D2.1 The ten kinds of realization: of doctrine, of meaning, 
of reality, subsequent realization, of the triple gem, of the absence 
of wandering, final realization, of disciples, of self-enlightened 
Buddhas, and of Bodhisattvas. 

D2.2 The eleven differences between the realization of 
disciples and the Bodhisattvas and the ten differences between the 


ABHIDHARMASAMUCCAYA 447 


result of their respective practices. 
D2.3 The nineteen special qualities and their effects: 

D2.3.1 Four boundless things: friendship, 
compassion, joy, equanimity, by means of which the practitioner 
rejects enmity, cultivates pity, amasses merit, and helps beings 
towards salvation. 

D2.3.2 Eight liberations: a series of eight altered 
states of consciousness culminating in the complete cessation of 
conceptualization and sensation, by means of which the practitioner 
is able to dwell in supreme tranquillity. 

D2.3.3 Eight spheres of mastery. Another series of 
eight altered states, by means of which the practitioner gains 
mastery over the methods learned and practised in the liberations. 

D2.3.4 Ten all-inclusive senses, a series of ten 
meditational methods by way of which the practitioner perfects the 
liberations. 

D2.3.5 Nonpassion, a state of peace in which the 
arising of passions is guarded against. 

D2.3.6 Vow-knowledge, by means of which the 
practitioner learns to explain past, present and future and becomes 
highly esteemed in the world. 

D2.3.7 Four discriminations relating to doctrine, 
meaning, grammar, and discourse, by means of which the 
practitioner is enabled to satisfy the minds of beings with teaching. 

D2.3.8 Six higher faculties consisting in 
supernatural power, magical vision, telepathy, memory of previous 
births, knowledge of the birth and death of others, and knowledge 
of the destruction of passions. The practitioner uses these magical 
powers to attract others to an understanding of Buddhist doctrine. 

D2.3.9 Major and minor characteristics: the 
distinguishing physical characteristics which belong to a Buddha by 
means of which he pleases beings. 

D2.3.10 Four purities, consisting in purity of basis, 
of object, of mind and of knowledge, by mastery over which the 
practitioner is able to decide his future fate and can become a 
Buddha. 

D2.3.11 Ten powers, not listed fully. 

D2.3.12 Four confidences: concerning 
enlightenment, destruction of passions, hindrances and the path 


448 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


leading to deliverance. By means of these the practitioner overcomes 
heretics who disagree with him. 

D2.3.13 Three foundations of mindfulness: not 
listed fully in this text. By means of these the practitioner attracts 
to himself a retinue. 

D2.3.14 Three things which need not be guarded 
against, not fully listed in this text. By means of these the 
practitioner constantly exhorts and teaches the multitude. 

D2.3.15 Nonloss: this consists in perfect memory, 
by means of which the practitioner is enabled to neither forget nor 
neglect the duties of a Buddha. 

D2.3.16 Destruction of proclivities, the complete 
destruction in the past of a Buddha of all karmic effect, by means 
of which all his actions appear to others completely free of 
defilement. 

D2.3.17 Great compassion, by means of which the 
practitioner surveys the world six times in each day and night. 

D2.3.18 Eighteen qualities unique to a Buddha, not 
fully listed in this text. By means of these the practitioner, after 
becoming a Buddha, dominates all disciples and individual Buddhas. 

D2.3.19 Knowledge of all aspects: omniscience, by 
means of which the doubts of all beings are destroyed. 

D2.4 The progress of a Bodhisattva: Here the 
Abhidharmasamuccaya deals with some miscellaneous questions 
concerning the Bodhisattva's progress in spiritual practice, the 
differences between his practice and that of the disciples, and his 
development of skill in meditation. 

D2.4.1 Skill in meditation concerning six kinds of 
knowables: error, the basis of error, the basis of the absence of 
error, error-and-non-error, non-error and the outflow of non-error. 

D2.4.2 Skill in meditation concerning spiritual 
method of four kinds, consisting in skill in the methods of saving 
beings, in the development of Buddha-qualities, in the rapid 
attainment of superknowledge, and in the noninterruption of the 
path. 

D2.4.3 Skill in meditation concerning 
discrimination of the unreal (abhitavikalpa):** of ten kinds, basic 
discrimination, discrimination of an image, discrimination of the 
appearance of an image, discrimination of the transformation of an 


ABHIDHARMASAMUCCAYA 449 


image, discrimination of the transformation of the appearance of an 
image, discrimination caused by someone else, incorrect 
discrimination, correct discrimination, discrimination consisting in 
attachment (to views), distracted discrimination. This last category 
is itself divided into ten subtypes. These categories are meant to 
describe the details of the mental process by which, in Yogacara 
thought, the impression of an external world, a lebenswelt, is 
constructed. 

D2.4.4 Skill in meditation concerning 
nondiscrimination: of three kinds, absence of discrimination 
consisting in contentment, in absence of error, and in absence of 
intellectual elaboration. 


E. ANALYSIS OF DEBATE 


This section has to do with what are essentially hermeneutical 
questions: the proper principles to be used in the interpretation of 
texts and the appropriate methods to be used in deciding between 
opposed philosophical views. 

El Definition and subdivisions (P138a8-138b1; D117a6-7; 
Pr102.18-20) 

E2 Analysis of meaing (P138b1-138b6; D117a7-117b5; Pr102.21- 
103.8) in a sixfold division: 

E2.1 The meaning of essential nature which has to do 
with the three natures of Yogacara ontological theory. 

E2.2 The meaning of cause, concerning the causes of 
arising, continuity, and accomplishment. 

E2.3 The meaning of result, concerning the standard five 
results: of maturation, of outflow, of dominating result, of human 
action, of separation. 

E2.4 The meaning of action, concerning the five actions 
of perception, of operation, of intention, of transformation, of 
obtaining. 

E2.5 The meaning of bond, concerning the five types of 
union: collective, consequent, conjoined, circumstantial, 
transforming. 

E2.6 The meaning of function, concerning five functions: 
that of characteristics, of position, of error, of non-error, of division. 

E3 Analysis cf explanation (P138b6-139a3; D117b5-118al; 


450 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Pr103.9-15). The programmatic definition here is "that by means of 
which one explains the stitras", thus a discussion of hermeneutical 
philosophy and commentarial methods. ; ; 

E3.1 Sixfold division of the analysis of explanation 
without explaining the meanings of the terms used: the subject to 
be comprehended, the meaning to be comprehended, the approach 
to comprehension, the essential nature of comprehension, the result 
of comprehension, and the experience of that result. ; 

E3.2 A fourteenfold listing of the means by which the 
explanation (of texts) can properly be achieved, essentially an 
explanation of commentarial methods. Once again, the terms are 
given no explanation. ; 

E3.2.1 The grouping of explanation 
E3.2.2 The grouping of subjects 
E3.2.3 Major and minor factors 
E3.2.4 Successive order 

E3.2.5 Rejecting 

E3.2.6 Transforming the letters 
E3.2.7 Elimination and nonelimination 
E3.2.8 Classification of persons 
E3.2.9 Classification of divisions 
E3.2.10 Methods 

E3.2.11 Comprehension, etc. 
E3.2.12 Force and gentleness 
E3.2.13 Abstraction 

E3.2.14 Endeavor 

E4 Analysis of analytical demonstration (P139a3-4; D118al1-2; 
Pr103.16-18). Brief exposition of the method of commenting upon 
a text by relating its component parts one to another. 

ES Analysis of questions (P139a4-6; D118a2-4; Pr103.19-104.2). 
This method has to do with deciding issues of truth and falsity by 
refutation, proof, analysis, or explication. 

E6 Analysis of grouping (P139a6-139b1; D118a4-6; Pr104.3-7). 
Ten topics according to which issues can be grouped, again without 
defining the terms used: 

E6.1 According to the accomplishment of the task in hand 
E6.2 According to entry (into the three vehicles) 

E6.3 According to resolve 

E6.4 According to reason 


ABHIDHARMASAMUCCAYA 451 


E6.5 According to debate 

E6.6 According to penetration 

E6.7 According to purity 

E6.8 According to the diverse stages of endeavor 

E6.9 According to effort and spontaneity 

E6.10 According to the achievement of all goals. 

E7 Analysis of argument (P139b1-141a1; D118a6-120a5; 
Pr104.7-106.18). A discussion of the possible types of argument, a 
discussion which at times clearly reflects public debate situations 
and at other times shades over into a comparatively undeveloped 
logical system. Here also the terms used are scarcely discussed. 

E7.1 Argument: of six kinds, including argument itself, 
rumor, debate, reproach, approval, and instruction. 

E7.2 Public argument: the context here is that of public 
debate; the text enumerates some of the settings in which such 
debates could occur. 

E7.3 Basis of argument. In this section we are provided a 
brief summary of the technical terminology of logic current at the 
time. 

E7.3.1 The object of proof, the theory to be 
established. The object of proof is divided into two kinds, the 
essential and specific. 

E7.3.2 The method of proof is divided into eight 
kinds: thesis, reason, example, application, conclusion, direct 
perception, inference, and authoritative tradition. The first five are 
the major parts of a valid inferential schema; the latter three are the 
standard instruments of knowledge. 

E7.4 Ornament of argument: this refers to a person skilled 
in the use of correct logic who argues well in public. 

E7.5 Defeat in argument. Loss of an argument is said to 
occur in three ways: first, by abandoning the argument as a result 
of recognising the faults in one's own argument and the good 
qualities in one's opponent's; second, by an inappropriate diversion 
from the subject at hand; and third, by making a logical error. 

E7.6 Escape from an argument: on the grounds of the 
opponent's incompetence, the inappropriateness of the audience or 
knowledge of one's own incapacity. 

E7.7 Qualities greatly useful for argument, of which there 
are essentially three. First, thorough knowledge of one's own 


452 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


doctrine and that of one's adversaries; second, self-confidence in 
one's ability to perform in public; third, readiness with speech, the 
ability to think on one's feet. At this point the text also enumerates 
twelve reasons why, according to the Mahayanabhidharmasutra, a 
Bodhisattva possessed of all appropriate good qualities is no longer 
able to undertake debate with opponents. These twelve reasons 
consist essentially in the view that public debate based on the rules 
of logic - one of the major methods by which doctrinal disputes 
appear to have been carried on in Buddhist India - is not necessarily 
conducive either to finding truth or to attaining salvation, and may 
in fact be detrimental to both goals. 

E8 Analysis of indirect intention (P141a1-141a8; D120a5-120b4; 
Pr106.18-107.14). An indirect intention is one obscured by the 
literal sense of the words expressing it, one which therefore requires 
the application of some more-or-less well defined hermeneutical 
method in order to make it manifest. The text quotes a number of 
siitra extracts to illustrate this point, texts which are prima facie 
contrary to some fundamental Buddhist tenet, but which can be 
made to accord with it by using the appropriate interpretive 
method. 

E9 The meaning of the title "Abhidharmasamuccaya" (P141a8- 
141b1; D120b4-6; Pr107.15-17). The work concludes thus: "Why is 
this work called ‘Abhidharmasamuccaya’? Because it is a collection 
made with comprehension; because it is a complete collection; 
because it is a perfect collection.” 


169.ASANGA, Trisatikayah Prajfaparamita Karikasaptati 


The attribution of this commentary on the Vajracchedika to 
Asanga is rather debatable; it is attributed to him by some 
subcommentators, to Vasubandhu by others. A commentary (see 191 
below) on it is attributed to Vasubandhu. With no particular 
conviction, we shall treat the text here and the commentary under 
Vasubandhu below. See the introductory comments by Tucci on his 
edition/translation (our E and T) for speculation on these matters. 
Tucci himself seems unsure, though his last word (p. 18) decides in 
favor of Vasubandhu's authorship of both text and commentary. 
Conze,*™ on the other hand, has no doubt as to both being Asanga's, 
considering this commentary "a real masterpiece" and that it "shows 





VAJRACCHEDIKABHASYA 453 


how the different chapters (of the Vajracchedika) are linked to one 
another". 

The "-saptati", "seven", of the title apparently derives from the 
commentator Vasubandhu's division of the subject-matter covered 
in this text into seven topics (Tucci, p. 24). 

The edition and translation that we use is the work of Giuseppe 
Tucci (Minor Buddhist Texts, Part | (Roma 1956; Japan 1978; Delhi 
1986). The edition ("E") occupies pages 1-92; the translation ("T") 
pages 93-128. There is also an edition of the Sanskrit text.4% Tucci 
uses a Sanskrit text of Nepalese origin that he says is rather the 
piel for wear, as well as a Chinese translation (T.1514) by I 

ng. 


1.(E54; T93)) The highest favor should be considered to the body 
and what it involves. The highest gratification will accrue should 
one neither give up what has been acquired nor what is yet to be 
acquired. 

2.(ES4; T93) The intention of helping others, resting in one's 
mind, is filled with positive characteristics. It is extensive, supreme, 
nonerroneous. 

3.(E55; T94) The six perfections involve giving of good, 
fearlessness, and the dharma. This path, whether by one, two or 
three of these, is unlimited. 

4.(ES5; T94-95) No attachment to the existence of self, to 
reward, or to karmic maturation. Two things are to be avoided: 
failure to be generous and generosity wrongly motivated. 

5.(E56; T95) Controlling awareness by keeping it free from the 
assumptions of signs of things and eliminating doubts. 

6.(ES6; T9S-96) If it is supposed that success is something 
conditioned, it must be realized that it does not consist in acquiring 
any marks; rather, success is becoming a tathdgata, because of its 
being different from the three characteristic marks, being in fact the 
absence of these. 

7.(ES7; T96) The teaching of something deep, along with that of 
cause and effect involved in it, even in this cosmic age is not 
fruitless, since even now there are Bodhisattvas who have the three 
marks. 

8.(ES7; T97) Because of their devoted training and because of 
their attainment of goodness, those (Bodhisattvas) other than the 


454 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Buddha follow the precepts and possess merit. 

9.(E58; T97) Since they have cut off any conceptual identification 
with persons or factors they possess wisdom. These identifications 
are of eight kinds because their objects are eight. 

10.(E58; T97) There are four identifications of self--as stream of 
consciousness from an earlier existence, as something occurring 
now, as something living, and as something that has passed away. 

11.(E59; T98) Identifications of factors are also four--because all 
factors don't exist, because absence exists, because there is nothing 
to be spoken about, and because we speak as if there were 
something to be spoken about. 

12.(E59; T98-99) Identification of what actually exists occurs 
because of resolve, because of serenity, by grasping what is not 
spoken, and by grasping what is correctly indicated. 

13.(E60; T99) These qualities are not inferred from their results, 
put the Buddhas identify their possessors' (the Bodhisattvas') vows 
and knowledge. This refutes those who ascribe such (to themselves) 
through desire for profit and honor. 

14.(E60; T99) Attainment of dharma cannot be by resting in it 
nor by not conforming to it; like a raft it should be rejected (when 
one reaches the other shore). This is believed to be the proper 
interpretation of dharma. 

15.(E61; T100) Neither Buddha nor dharma are sought as 
magical beings. Rather, what is taught is that (factors) are not 
grasped in either of two ways and are thus inexpressible, since it is 
not within the scope of definition. 

16.(E61; T100-101) The grasping and teaching of that (dharma) 
is not useless, because it leads to acquisition of merit, merit because 
it is not the ground of enlightenment and because both (grasping 
and teaching) are enlightening. 

17.(E62; T101) Merit is the summit, since it is the cause of 
attaining what is essential, because it leads to birth in another body, 
and because of the uniqueness of a Buddha's factors. 

18.(E62; T102) Because it cannot be grasped it can't be spoken 
of, since one's own (karmic) fruits cannot be grasped. Because he is 
free from both obstructions, in Subhiiti both are absent. 

19.(E63; T102) (Sakyamuni) did not receive any instruction by 
words from the Buddha Dipamkara. That shows that in his 
realization nothing was grasped or spoken of. 


VAJRACCHEDIKABHASYA 455 


20.(E63; T102-103) One can't partake in the Buddha's field, since 
it is merely the outcome of the Buddha's awareness. Because of its 
unseparated and unique nature its arrangement is thought to be 
nonarrangement. 

21.(E64; T103) Just as Sumeru cannot grasp itself as King of the 
mountains, so no Buddha can grasp himself as experiencing, since 
he is without contaminants and subject to conditions. 

23-25.(E65-66; T104-106) The merit of dharma stands out from 
other merits because it makes two things worthy, because of the 
greatness of its outcome, because it is not the cause of defilements, 
because of the’preferable frustrations that result from it, because its 
purposes are difficult to realize and are the highest purposes, 
because it is profound and deep, because it is superior to other 
siitras, because its connections are great and pure. 

26-27.(E66-67; T106-107) The difficult practice of the path is 
good because its merits are immeasurable. There is no frustration 
because of the absence of identifications of self or malice, because 
it is accompanied by satisfaction since, involving compassion, it does 
not involve frustration as its result. 

28.(E67; T107) Because of this it takes strong effort to maintain 
the abandonment of awareness through the perfection of patience. 

29.(E68; T108) Proper practice should be understood as the 
cause of the purposes of beings, but it should not be concluded that 
beings must therefore be admitted to be actual entities. 

30.(E68; T108) A supposed actual entity is only the name of 
some aggregates. Through the departure of such identifications from 
the conquering one there is absence of them for the Buddhas who 
possess the vision of reality. 

31.(E69; T109) The path does not depend on a result, but is 
nevertheless the cause of a result, because Buddhas tell the truth 
and that truth is fourfold. 

32.(E69; T109) The thesis, the teachings of Hinayana, the 
teachings of Mahayana, and the teaching of all the grammatical 
forms. 

33.(E70; T109-110) Since it is not about anything and is in 
agreement, the teaching is neither true nor false. The teaching 
behaves as an antidote to taking words in their literal meaning. 

34.(E70; T110)*% Though suchness is always everywhere, it 
cannot be realized by those who, on account of ignorance, have 


456 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


their mind reposing somewhere, but, on the contrary, it is realized 
by another whose mind, on account of knowledge, reposes nowhere. 

35.(E71; T110) Ignorance is like darkness, while knowledge is 
like light. The antidote and its opposite respectively lead to 
realization and its opposite. 

36.(E71; T110) Now it will be explained what kind of dharma is 
derived from which sort of practice and what are its karmic effects. 

37.(E72; T111) The dharma is of three kinds: with respect to its 
phrasing, respecting understanding of it, and relating to spreading 
the word. Regarding its meaning, it is understood by oneself or 
another through hearing it and meditating on it. 

38.(E72; T111) This behavior causes the spiritual ripeness of 
other creatures. So one kind of merit is superior to the other by the 
greatness of its actuality as well as by the longer time it takes. 

39-41.(E73-74; T111-112) The following are the results of 
performance of dharma: not being accessible, isolation, being 
resorted to by great people, the difficulty of being understood, 
access to the highest realm, understanding the supreme dharma, 
ability to purify the place where the dharma was taught, the ability 
to clear away abstractions, the swift realization of the higher 
faculties, the ripeness of the accomplishments in various worlds. 

42.(E74; T112-113) Thinking one is a Bodhisattva is called an 
obstruction to awareness. Awareness is unlocated. 

44.(E75; T114) Factors are without any essential nature. 

45.(E76; T114) By his having a body of factors (dharmakaya) the 
Buddha is like a person. 

46.(E76; T114) This body is also a "great" body because of its 
great qualities. But the Buddha is said to be bodiless because he has 
no body. 

47.(E77; T115) Wrong views include bad ideas about the ground 
of all factors, the notion that we can cause beings to be liberated, 
and the purification of fields. 

48.(E77; T115) One who considers the factors of beings and 
Bodhisattvas as without self, whether he is noble or not, should be 
considered wise. 

49.(E78; T115) Even though no factors are experienced by him, 
that doesn't mean the Buddha has no eyes, for his vision is fivefold 
and it sees erroneous things. 

50.(E78; T115) Because those various erroneous manifestations 


meena stag AET TEE tHE. 1 nidot tober epee paameascs SAN tc gptciont eR IaE tsa gis RERIICE SOP 


= 


VAJRACCHEDIKABHASYA 457 


are excluded from the establishment of mindfulness they are bound 
to be without basis--thus they are called erroneous. 

51.(E79; T116) There is no erroneousness in merit, inasmuch as 
merit should be realized as the basis of knowledge. So an example 
of this sign of merit is given (in the Vajracchedikasiitra). 

52-53.(E79-80; T117) The fulfilment of the body of factors is not 
said to consist in secondary phrasing, nor should the 
accomplishment of one's marks be thought to be the absence of a 
body. But both these accomplishments, since they are not different 
from one's body of factors itself, should not be considered different 
from the tathagata himself. 

54.(E80; T117-118) Like the Buddha, his teaching can't be held 
to exist, since the teaching, not being different from a body of 
factors, has no essential nature of its own. 

55.(E81; T118) It is not that there are none who have faith in the 
depth of what is taught or their teacher. They are not beings, nor 
are they nonbeings--but they are the nobles who are not (yet?) 
noble. 

56-57.(E81-82; T119) In the body of factors there is no growth-- 
there is a natural sameness of purity. Because no factor is defiled 
or involves a lower method, no factor is good. 

58.(E82; T120) And so the teaching, being neutral, should not be 
thought of as unattainable. Therefore only this jewel of the dharma 
is superior to any other. 

60.(E83; T120-121) Since beings are the same as the ground of 
all factors, none are liberated by the victorious ones, since factors 
along with names are not outside that ground. 

61.(E84; T121) Belief in their being factors is like the fault of 
belief in a self. If someone who is to be liberated is admitted this 
should be considered to be the admission of something inadmissible. 

62.(E84; T121-122) The tathdgata is not to be inferred from a 
material body since he is only a body of factors. A universal ruler 
cannot be considered a tathagata. 

63.(E85; T122) The body of factors is not gotten by the 
maturation of characteristic marks, for the method is different. 

64.(E85; T122) Ordinary folk do not know the Buddha, since 
they only experience his form and hear his voice. The body of 
factors, which is suchness, goes beyond the field of consciousness. 

65. (E86; T122-123) By following the Buddhist path, involving the 


458 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


belief that there are no real factors, etc., merit is not thereby 
destroyed, because one has arrived at the pure view. 

66.(E86; T123) Since that merit does not mature into any result, 
acceptance of it does not lead to wrong grasping of it. 

67-68.(E87; T123) The magical result of that merit is the action 
that Buddhas automatically accomplish. Their movement, etc. is 
accomplished by magical means, for a Buddha is always motionless. 
Their location in the ground of all factors is held to be neither 
identity with nor difference from it. 

69.(E88; T124) The example of reducing the universe into atomic 
dust suggests the same point, showing how defilements should be 
destroyed in the way things are reduced to dust. 

70.(E88; T124) The fact that matter is not caused by 
accumulation shows that there is not ultimate unity, and the fact 
that collectivity occurs shows that there is not ultimate diversity. 

71.(E89; T125) Because the ordinary person only speaks in 
ordinary ways he understands all this in a different way. Attainment 
of enlightenment does not come through the absence of selves and 
factors, since both do not exist. 

72.(E89; T125) Therefore both such a view and its rejection 
involve the construction of something pointless and nonexistent. 
Both are a subtle covering that is destroyed by knowledge. 

73.(E90; T126) That covering should be eliminated by the 
twofold knowledge and by meditation on it. 

74.(E90; T126) Tathagatas do not say "I am a magical being"--so, 
since they do not speak of a self their teaching is correct. 

75.(E91; T126-127) The tathagatas' liberation is produced neither 
by conditions nor by something else. This can be understood by 
considering correct awareness in nine ways: 

76.(E91; T127-128) As regards vision, signs, consciousness, 
support, body, experiences, what is past, what is present and what 
is future. 

77.(E92; 1128) Through understanding the activity of 
characterized experiences one obtains mastery over conditioning 
factors. 


459 


170. ASANGA, Mahayanasamgraha 


The Sanskrit text of this work is lost. There are Chinese 
translations by Buddhaganta (T.1592), Paramartha (T.1593), 
Dharmagupta (T.1596) and Hsiian-tsang (T.1594), as well as a 
Tibetan translation by Jinamitra, Silendrabodhi and Ye-Ses-sde. 
Hsiian-tsang's and the Tibetan translation are provided in Etienne 
Lamotte,’” whose French translation of Hsiian-tsang's version 
consitutes our "T". Lamotte has also translated the second Chapter 
into French,** indicated here as "T2". 

Asaiiga's authorship of this work has been questioned.” It is one 
of the works ascribed to Maitreya, who seems to have been a 
fictional person. It is a seminal work in the development of 
Yogacara philosophy. Since the philosophical weight of the work 
lies, however, in its first three Chapters, they are the only ones 
which will be summarized here. We provide translations of the 
titles of the remaining Chapters.°” 


Summary by Stefan Anacker 
Introduction 


1-2.(E1-6) The speech of the Buddha is marked by ten special 
qualities: (1) the support of that which can be known, (2) the 
characteristic marks of that which can be known, (3) entry into the 
characteristic marks of that which can be known, (4) the cause and 
effect of this entry, (5) the diverse cultivations involved in the cause 
and effect of this entry, (6) the higher virtue involved in these 
practices, (7) the higher awareness involved in these practices, (8) 
the higher wisdom involved in these practices, (9) the abandoning 
of adverse factors which is the result of these practices, (10) the 
knowledge which is the result of these practices. 

3.(E7-9) The support of what can be known is the storehouse 
consciousness. The characteristics of what can be known are the 
three essential natures, viz., the constructed, dependent, and 
perfected. Entry into the characteristics of what can be known is the 
state of consciousness-only (vijfiaptimatrata). The cause and effect 
of this entry comprises the six perfections. The diverse cultivations 
involved in the cause and effect of this entry are the ten stages. The 


460 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Bodhisattva's practice is higher virtue. Mahayana meditational 
concentrations are the higher awareness. Constructionfree 
knowledge is the higher wisdom. A nirvana which takes its stand 
nowhere (apratisthitanirvana) is the abandonment of adverse factors 
which is the result of these practices; and the three Buddha-bodies 
are the knowledge which is the result of these practices. These ten 
features form the ten subjects of the ten chapters of this treatise. 

4.(E9-10) Since only the Mahayana treats these subjects, only the 
Mahayana can be considered the word of the Buddha. 

5.(E10-11) These ten features follow a causal sequence: at first 
Bodhisattvas realize dependent origination, then, to avoid the 
extremes of superimposition and denial, they know about the 
characteristics of factors dependently originated, then they penetrate 
these characteristics, then, based on the six perfections, they reach 
basic purification (adhydsrayavisuddhi), then they practise the 
perfections to an ultimate extent in the ten stages, then they fulfill 
the three spiritual trainings of the Bodhisattva, then they realize 
ultimate right enlightenment. 


CHAPTER ONE 


1.(T12-13) Quotes a siitra®” as stating that the storehouse 
consciousness precedes temporal distinctions, is the common support 
of all factors, and makes possible all passages into other destinies 
and nirvana. 

2.(T13) The storehouse consciousness has all the seeds and 
settles (aliyate) in all factors. 

3.(T13-14) All factors are settled in the storehouse consciousness 
as its effect, and it itself settles in all factors as their cause. 

4.(T14) This consciousness is also called the appropriating 
consciousness (@danavijfiadna). Quotes 136.Samdhinirmocanasiitra 
V.7 to this effect. , 

5.(T14-15) It is called thus because it appropriates the material 
organs and because it is the basis for the appropriation of a sense 
of identity in rebirths. 

6.(T15-17) Though "citta", "manas", and "vyfiana" have been 
termed synonyms (all meaning awareness), there are two special 
senses of "manas": any sensory consciousness serving as the 
condition for an immediately subsequent mental consciousness 


MAHAYANASAMGRAHA 461 


(manovijfiana) is called "manas", but manas is also (in Asanga's new 
usage) a seventh type of consciousness, the defiled mind 
(klistamanas) which gives a false sense of self. 

7.(T17-22) Question: How does one know that manas in the 
second sense exists? 

Answer: Without it, there could be no uncompounded (aveniki) 
ignorance, i.e., a basic ignorance not yet associated with all the 
diverse defilements but standing as their basis. Besides, the mental 
consciousness must also have a simultaneous support, as do the 
sensory consciousnesses which have such supports in their material 
organs. Such a simultaneous support can only be the defiled mind. 
Also, the very etymology of manas has to do with "mine", which can 
be explained only by the klistamanas. Also, without it there would 
be no difference between the non-identifying trance and the 
cessation trance, for only the latter is free of defiled mind. Also, the 
sense of an existence of self is always existent in nonsaintly states: 
there must be some special consciousness to account for the 
persistence of this sense. This defiled mind is always defiled by the 
false view of self, pride of self, attachment to self, and ignorance, 
but is itself ethically neutral. 

8.(T22-23) It is from the storehouse consciousness that all the 
other consciousnesses arise. 

9.(T23) How can the storehouse consciousness be called 
"awareness" at all? Because it is accumulated by the proclivity-seeds. 

10.(T23-26) Why is the storehouse consciousness not mentioned 
in the Hinayana? Because it is too subtle for it. 

11.(T26-28) Besides, it is mentioned there under various 
synonyms--the root-consciousness of the Mahasanghikas, etc. Asanga 
takes an Ekottaragama (cf. Anguttara II, 131) passage and contorts 
it to indicate belief in the storehouse consciousness. 

13.(T29-30) Considering the storehouse consciousness as being 
"themselves", sentient beings crave the annihilation of frustration. 
But at the same time, because they are linked to a false sense of "I", 
they in no way really want the annihilation of frustrating factors 
(since the sense of "I" is the basis of all these frustrations and yet 
sentient beings wish to continue to exist with an "I"). Even those 
sentient beings who have passed beyond attachment to pleasures, 
etc., are still attached to a sense of "I'. 

14.(T30-32) The storehouse consciousness is the generative cause 


462 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of all experienced factors, as it colors them all. Furthermore, it is 
always present as the cause of all defiled factors. Finally, it is itself 
the result of traces. 

15.(T33) What is meant by "trace"? A trace is a generative cause 
of an experienced factor which involves a simultaneous arising and 
perishing as far as this factor-sequence is concerned. For instance, 
sesame seeds are "impregnated" by their flower, but the seeds are 
the cause of the flower, too. The flower perishes, the seeds persist; 
the seeds perish, the flower arises. The same with awarenesses: the 
sensory awareness perishes, its impression persists; the impression 
fades, but colors future sensory awarenesses. 

16.(T33-34) Is there then really a difference between the 
storehouse consciousness and the traces themselves? Actually, the 
storehouse consciousness is neither different nor nondifferent from 
the traces. But one says that the storehouse-consciousness stores the 
traces, because it has the power to engender defiled factors. 

17.(T34-35) Storehouse consciousness and defiled factors are 
simultaneous reciprocal causes. How is this? An analogous case is a 
lamp, where the arising of the flame and the combustion of the wick 
are reciprocal and simultaneous. Thus, the storehouse 
consciousness is the cause of defiled factors, and the defiled factors 
are the cause of the storehouse consciousness. 

18.(T36) How can a process leaving traces, which is itself 
nondiverse, give rise to diverse factors? This is like the case of a 
piece of clothing which has been treated at various places with 
different substances Being put into a uniform dye, its colors appear 
as diverse when it is brought out of this uniform dye. (Processes like 
batik come to mind.) In the same way, the storehouse consciousness 
is impressed with various traces: at the moment of origination it is 
not diverse, but a multitude of diverse factors are manifested in the 
trace once originated. 

19.(T36-37) In the Mahayana we speak of a subtle dependent 
origination. This is the dependent origination which has to do with 
the nature of things, which equals the storehouse consciousness. 

20.(T37-38) It is those who are confused as to the storehouse 
consciousness who imagine the origin of phenomena in an essential 
nature, in previous retributory actions, in the transformations of a 
God, or in a self; or, they deny causality altogether. It is like blind 
men who are asked what an elephant is like--one touches the trunk 


MAHAYANASAMGRAHA 463 


and says an elephant is like a plough, another touches the tusks, 
and says an elephant is like a pestle, another touches the ears, and 
says an elephant is like a winnowing basket, etc. In the same way, 
people who do not have the whole. picture of the storehouse 
consciousness imagine an own-being, retributory actions as creating 
phenomena, transformations of a God, etc. 

21.(T38-39) The storehouse consciousness is a retributory 
consciousness which stores all the seeds. 

25.(T44-46) Though the external seeds (sensory impressions) 
may not always arise, the internal seeds of the storehouse 
consciousness are always arising. 

26.(T46) The other seven consciousnesses are called the evolving 
functioning consciousnesses (pravrttivijiana) and they relate to 
experience. (164.Madhyantavibhaga is quoted as if a work by a 
different author.) 

27.(T46-48) The evolving consciousness and storehouse 
consciousness are reciprocal conditions. 

29.(T49) Defilement and purification are possible only with the 
existence of a substratum, thus the storehouse consciousness is 
demonstrated. 

30.(T49-52) Because functioning consciousnesses are momentary, 
they cannot account for defilement and purification. 

31.(T52) There would be no accounting for states where the 
functioning consciousnesses are absent (as in the attainment of 
cessation) if there were no storehouse consciousness. 

32.(T52-53) Whenever a consciousness which is antidotal to the 
defilements arises, there could be no possibility for the future arising 
of defilements (which does occur) without there being a storehouse 
consciousness. 

33-34.(TS3-57) There would be no possibility for the carry-over 
of traces from one moment to the next, especially from one 
meditational sphere to another, without an underlying 
consciousness. There would also be no carry-over of proclivities from 
one birth to the next. . 

35.(T57-58) There could be no arising of material organs in an 
embryo without a consciousness preceding the arising of the seven 
functioning consciousnesses. 

38.(T60-61) Though the carry-over of traces from one life to the 
next could be explained through a mental consciousness, in the case 


464 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of the higher meditational states (where the mental consciousness 
is absent), if an organism dies in these states, there could be no 
possibility of the carry-over of proclivities into the next life if a 
storehouse consciousness did not exist. 

40-42.(T61-63) This is also the case because a supramundane 
awareness destroys the series of other kinds of awarenesses. 

43.(T63-64) Mundane purification would be impossible without 
the storehouse consciousness. Why? Those who have not yet 
abandoned the lusts of the realm of desire and have not yet attained 
an awareness belonging to the material realm make an effort, 
through a good awareness of the realm of desire, to free themselves 
from the lusts of the realm of desire. But this awareness of 
application belonging to the realm of desire could not arise or perish 
with a usual awareness of the realm of desire, so it can't be 
impressed by the latter, not can it be the seed of the latter. So it 
can only be a retributory consciousness which has all the seeds, and 
which continues as an uninterrupted series, which can be the causal 
condition of this awareness' entering the material realm, whereas 
the good awareness of effort belonging to the realm of desire can 
only be a dominant condition. 

44.(T64-65)° In a similar way, supramundane purification 
would also be impossible without a storehouse consciousness. Why? 
For one thing, the Buddha has said "Words coming from another, 
and internal careful mental attentions, are the causes of right 
views". Words coming from another and internal careful mental 
attention impress either an auditory consciousness, a mental 
consciousness, or the two together. But during a careful mental 
attention, an auditory consciousness no longer arises, and the 
mental consciousness may still be distracted. When the awareness 
arises from careful mental attention the mental attention impressed 
by the former auditory consciousness has already perished. Thus it 
cannot be the seed for the awareness arising from careful mental 
attention. Furthermore, a worldly awareness associated with careful 
mental attention cannot arise with a supramundane awareness 
associated with right views. Nor can it be impressed by the former. 
Thus the former cannot be its seed. So supramundane alleviation is 
also impossible without a storehouse consciousness. 

45.(T65-66) Objection: It seems that the same trouble arises if we 
assume the storehouse consciousness as the seed of a supramundane 


MAHAYANASAMGRAHA 465 


consciousness. The storehouse consciousness is endowed with all the 
seeds, and is the cause of affliction. How can it be the seed of an 
unafflicted awareness? 

Answer: Because the storehouse consciousness does have all the 
seeds. The supramundane awareness arises from that seed which is 
a trace of a former auditory consciousness, and which is an outcome 
of the pure dharmadhatu. 

46.(T66-67) Objection: Is this trace of an auditory consciousness 
identical with the storehouse consciousness, or is it something 
different? If it is identical, how can it be its seed? If it isn't identical, 
where is the locus of this seed-trace of an auditory consciousness? 

Answer: Until complete enlightenment is reached this trace of an 
auditory consciousness stays in the storehouse consciousness. But it 
is not identical with the storehouse consciousness, since it is the 
seed or the antidote to the storehouse consciousness.*”* 

50.(T71-72) In the attainment of cessation there is still an 
awareness--this awareness can only be the storehouse consciousness. 

51.(T72) In the attainment of cessation, the functioning 
consciousness-streams are interrupted. Yet they are renewed after 
the attainment has ceased. 

52.(T72-74) Certain people believe that the awareness in the 
attainment of cessation is a mental consciousness. But the object of 
a mental consciousness does not arise in the attainment of cessation, 
nor is the form of such a consciousness apparent in such a state. In 
fact, a mental consciousness always implies identifications and 
feelings, both of which are of course absent in the attainment of the 
cessation (of feelings and identifications). 

53.(T74-75) Nor is it possible for any of the evolving 
consciousnesses to be separated from their accompanying mental 
factors. 

55.(T77) Certain people claim that the uninterrupted production 
of the materiality-aggregate is the seed for the consciousnesses 
arising after the attainment of cessation. But in that case there could 
never be a descent from the immaterial realm to the realm of desire. 

56.(T78) Defilement and purification would thus both be 
impossible without a storehouse consciousness. 

57.(T78-80) If good mental attention were potentially impure, 
how could there ever be a revolution at the basis of such an 
awareness into a totally undefiled state? The antidotes cannot be 


466 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the cause of such a revolutionizing, since an antidote is not 
equivalent to the severing of a defilement. If it were there would 
be no difference between cause and effect. If it is said that the 
revolutionizing of awareness is equivalent to the awareness’ losing 
its seeds, this also won't do, since the awareness is already past by 
the time the revolutionizing occurs. 

58-59.(T80-82) Characterizations of the storehouse consciousness 
in its various aspects: as proclivities to verbal activity, as proclivities 
to the view of self, as proclivities of all the constituent parts of the 
life-continuum, as projection of newly-arisen traces, as retribution, 
as cause of belief in a self held by the defiled mind, and a 
characteristic which is both similar in being the seed for the arising 
of that which is not consciously perceived and dissimilar in being 
the seed of that which is consciously perceived. 

60.(T82-84) In these aspects, it is the cause of both the insentient 
universe and the seed of the individual conditions for consciousness. 
The storehouse consciousness in the latter aspect is destroyed by the 
Buddhist path, whereas the storehouse consciousness in the former 
aspect continues, but becomes the content of a totally cleared 
seeing, which may however continue to be different in its specific 
forms even from one yogi to the next. 

61.(T84-86) The storehouse consciousness has both the 
characteristics of depravity and of complete tranquillity antidotal to 
such depravity--in its former aspect, it is the cause of defilements, 
in the latter it is the cause of good factors. The storehouse 
consciousness has the aspect of being consumed: thus a retribution 
finally ceases. It also has the aspect of being unconsumed, in the 
sense that new traces may arise. The storehouse consciousness, 
finally, is like a magical creation, like a mirage, like a dream, an 
optical illusion. It may further be either complete (in those of 
totally worldly awareness) or reduced (in those who have rejected 
worldly greeds). With disciples and Bodhisattvas it is partially 
destroyed; with nobles, self-enlightened ones and Buddhas it is 
exempt of all obstructions which are defilements. 

62.(T86) Question: Why is the storehouse consciousness called 
unobstructed but ethically neutral? It is, after all, the cause of good 
and bad factors. 

Answer: In being unobstructed but neutral, it opposes itself to 
neither the good nor the bad. If it were itself good, defilement 


MAHAYANASAMGRAHA 467 


would be impossible. If it were itself bad, purification would be 
impossible. 


CHAPTER TWO 


1.(T87) The characteristic marks of what can be known are the 
dependent characteristic (paratantralaksana), the mental 
constructed characteristic (parikalpita-laksana), and the perfected 
characteristic (parinispannalaksana). 

2.(T7-89) The dependent is all the perceptual manifestations 
which have as their seed the storehouse consciousness: they include 
the perceptions of a body (=the five sense-organs), of a possessor 
of the body (=the defiled mind), of an enjoyer (the mental 
consciousness), all perception of number, the perception of locus, 
the perceptions which come through practical usage, the perception 
of a distinction between "self and "others", and the perception of 
good and bad destinies, birth, and death. The first nine of these are 
the result of traces of verbal activity, the tenth is the result of traces 
of a view of a self, and the eleventh is the result of traces of all the 
constituent parts of existing. Cf. I, 58-59. 

3.(T90) The mentally constructed is the appearance of an object 
when there is no object, but only perception. 

4.(T90-91) The perfected is the absence of any characteristic of 
an object in the dependent. 

5.(T92) Arrangement of the elements in II.2 as the internal 
sensory domains, the external sensory domains, and_ their 
corresponding consciousnesses. 

6.(T92-93) Objection: Is there ever to be found a perception 
without a corresponding object? 

Answer: Certainly, as in a dream. 

Objection: But at emergence from a dream, it is recognized that 
the dream-perceptions had no corresponding objects. This, 
however, is not the case with other perceptions. 

Answer: Yes it is, because those who are awakened by the 
knowledge of reality realize that all their perceptions are without a 
corresponding object. 

7.(T93-96) Question: How can those who are not yet awakened 
in that sense know the existence of manifesting-only? 


468 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer: By scriptural authority, and by reasoning. In the 
83.Dasabhtimikasiitra the Buddha has said that the triple world (i-e., 
the sphere of desire, the material sphere, and the immaterial 
sphere) is nothing but awareness. (Quotes further the 
136.Samdhinirmocanasitra.) And by reasoning one can determine 
that the blue sense-objects seen in meditation do not correspond to 
an external object, but are consciousness-only. 

8.(T96-97) Furthermore, one may have perceptions in the form 
of memories of things long past--since those things no longer exist, 
it is clear that this is also consciousness-only . 

9.(T97-98) Objection: This may be so for mental phenomena, but 
how can you say that the sensory domains of visibles, etc., and of 
the eye, etc., are nothing but perceptions? 

Answer: By scriptural authority and by reasoning, as above. 

Objection: But these domains form series which are clearly 
material. 

Answer: It is this appearance of material series without there 
being really a material series which makes possible the perversion 
of considering the nonexistent existent. (Quotes 
165.Mahayanasiitralamkara X1.24 as if a work by a different 
author.) 

11.(T99-101) Consciousness-only can be considered in three 
aspects: as unitary, in being consciousness-only; as dual, in being 
endowed with the appearances of perception and perceiver; as 
infinitely varied, because of the appearance of innumerable aspects. 

12.(T101-103) Certain people believe that the first five 
consciousnesses do not exist, and that it is only the mental 
consciousness which takes these different aspects according to the 
sensory organ it is associated with. But the mental consciousness is 
never anything but a perception of a kind special to "itself’--it 
always has a double aspect: the appearance of an object only and 
the appearance of a conceptual construction. The perception of 
sensory organs is however different from this, since sensory 
characteristics are perceived. 

13.(7103) All other perceptions are the perceptions of signs of 
the storehouse consciousness. The perception of a mental 
consciousness forms its perception of observation, which in turn 
makes the appearances of objects arise. 

14.(T164-107) In regard to the same "object"-moment, different 


ri emma 


AR at is te 


ane te 


NAMB tr nse 


MAHAYANASAMGRAHA 469 


beings may have totally different perceptions. This demonstrates in 
itself that there is no "objective" object. Furthermore, the knowledge 
of Buddhas is a knowledge without objects--this again would be 
impossible if an "object" were something real. 

15.(T107-108) If the dependent is consciousness-only, in what 
sense is it dependent? Because it arises from its own traces (seeds), 
it is dependent on conditions. And because, after it arises, it is 
unable to exist by itself even for a moment, it is dependent. 

If the constructed is simply the appearance of a nonobject as 
object, in which way is it constructed? Because it lies at the origin 
of all the constructions of the mental consciousness, it is called 
constructed. 

If the perfeced is the total absence of the constructed in the 
dependent, why is it called perfected? Because it is the object of a 
totally purified awareness, and the best of all good factors. 

16.(T108-110) Construction is mental consciousness. The 
constructible is however the dependent. And the constructed nature 
is the aspect into which the dependent is constructed by the mental 
consciousness. 

17.(T110) The three essential natures (dependent, constructed, 
perfected) are neither different nor identical. The dependent, for 
instance, is dependent from one point of view, constructed from 
another (as in this treatise!), and perfected from yet another. It is 
dependent in the sense that it depends upon another thing to arise-- 
and that other thing depends upon it to arise. It is constructed as 
soon as it is a sign of a mental construction. It is perfected in the 
sense that it does not really exist at all in the way it is mentally 
constructed. 

20.(T112-115) Ten kinds of mental construction may arise: 

(1) the root construction, i.e., the store-consciousness; 

(2) the construction of signs--this is the construction of 
the perceptions of visibles, etc.; 

(3) the construction of the appearance of a sign; i.e., the 
notions of "visual consciousness", etc.; 

(4) the construction which entails a modification of the 
"object"--as those resulting from old age, from a pleasurable 
sensation, a difference of time of year, etc.; 

(5) the construction which is a modification of that which 
appears as an object, for instance, the modifications of perceptions 


470 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


brought about by previous perceptions; 

(6) construction which depends upon something other, 
ie., the constructions following upon hearing something which is 
not the dharma, and the constructions following upon hearing the 
dharma; 

(7) construction based on carelessness, e.g., the opinions 
of those completely removed from the Buddhist dharma; 

(8) construction based on carefulness, e.g., the 
preliminary views of those following the dharma; 

(9) constructions following from adherence to false views; 

(10) constructions of distractions in the Bodhisattva-path. 

21.(T115) The constructions of distractions in the Bodhisattva- 
path are: distraction as "nonbeing", distractions of "being", 
distractions on superimposition, distractions on denial, distractions 
on identities, distractions on differentiations, distractions on 
essential nature, distractions on specification, distractions involving 
interpreting an "object" according to its conventional name, 
distractions involving interpreting a name according to its "object". 

22.(T115-118) The antidotes to these ten are found in 
5.Astasahasrikaprajfid-paramita XI.77. "The Bodhisattva, being 
really a Bodhisattva": this is the antidote to the distraction on 
"nonbeing". "Does not perceive a Bodhisattva": this is the antidote to 
the distraction of being. "Does not conceive of the name 
‘Bodhisattva’, nor of any of the aggregates, etc.": this is the antidote 
to superimposition. "All this does not exist because of emptiness”: 
this is the antidote to denial. "The emptiness of materiality is not 
materiality": this is the antidote to identity. "Outside of emptiness, 
there is no materiality": this is the antidote to differentiation. 
"Materiality is nothing but a name": this is the antidote to essential 
nature. "There is neither birth, nor cessation, nor defilement, nor 
purification": this is the antidote to specifications. "Names are 
artificial": this is the antidote to distractions involving interpreting 
according to names. "The Bodhisattva conceives of no names": this 
is the antidote to distractions involving interpreting a name 
according to an "object". 

As an antidote to these ten distractions, the knowledge free from 
conceptual construction is taught in all the Prajiiaparamitasitras. 

23.(T118) All of the three essential natures are really included in 
the dependent. If this is so, why aren't the three identical? Inasmuch 


wo 


MAHAYANASAMGRAHA 471 


as it is really dependent, the dependent is not simply mentally 
constructed, and it is not perfected, either. Inasmuch as it is 
mentally constructed, it isn't really dependent or perfected. 
Inasmuch as it is perfected, it isn't dependent and_ isn't 
constructed. 

24.(T118-119) How can one know that the dependent which 
manifests itself as constructed is not really identical with the 
constructed? Before there is a name, a notion also doesn't exist.“ 
(Quotes 165.Mahayanastitralamkara XII.16 as if a work by another 
author.) 

25.(T120) If the dependent does not exist as it appears, why isn't 
it entirely nonexistent? Without the dependent, the perfected cannot 
exist. And if the dependent and the perfected did not exist, there 
could be neither defilement nor purification. 

26.(T120-122)%* It is the mentally constructed which is really 
nonexistent. The dependent, on the other hand, is like a magic 
show, a mirage, a dream, a reflection, a flash, an echo, the moon in 
the water, a transformation, i.e., it is not existent as it appears, but 
it is not nonexistent. The perfected, finally, is emptiness, the 
ultimate purification, the factors conducive to enlightenment, and 
the teaching of the Mahayana. 

27.(T122-124) The images used in relation to the interdependent 
answer questions such as the following: How can the nonexistent be 
perceived? 

28.(T124-125) Why did the Buddha say in _ the 
Brahmapariprcchastitra that he sees neither samsara nor nirvana? 
Because the dependent is constructed sometimes and perfected 
sometimes. The Buddha had in mind the nondifferentiation of 
samsara and nirvana. The dependent in its constructed aspect = 
samsara; the dependent in its perfected aspect = nirvana. 

29.(T125-126) The constructed in the dependent is defiled. The 
perfected in the dependent is purified. Thus the dependent itself can 
be either defiled or purified. 

30.(T126-129) Question: The Buddha has said in the 
133.Lankavatarasutra that all factors are eternal. But since factors 
are momentary, how could he say this? Answer: The dependent in 
its perfected aspect is eternal; the dependent in its constructed 
aspect is momentary. The same formula holds for other dualities: 
joy/frustration, welfare/lack of welfare, calm/noncalm, etc. Since 


472 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


factors are nonexistent and they arise in various ways (for example, 
the same sound-moment will appear different to each aggregate- 
complex in contact with it), there is neither a factor nor a non- 
factor. In a way they exist, in another they don't exist. (Quotes 
165.Mahdyanasiitralamkara X1.50-51 as if a work by a different 
author.) 

32.(T132-134) An exposition of the Mahayana must include the 
following points: the teaching of dependent origination, the teaching 
of the characteristics of the dependently originated, and the 
teaching of the meaning of received statements. The teaching of 
dependent origination comes in the statement that all factors have 
arisen from traces due to mental talk, and that the traces have also 
arisen from the factors. The teaching of the characteristics of the 
dependently originated is the teaching that the evolving 
consciousnesses have as their essential natures a _ perception 
endowed with a mental mark and an observation of this mark, and 
have as their characteristics the dependent as their support, the 
mentally constructed as their manner of appearance, and the 
perfected as underlying reality. For, in the dependent the 
constructed is really nonexistent, which is equivalent to saying that 
the perfected exists in the dependent. 

33.(T134-143) Explanations of each of the received statements 
regarding the Buddha (i.e., "The Buddha has a pure intellect", "The 
Buddha penetrates the dharma without characteristics", etc.), in 
terms of preceding expositions in this treatise. 

34.(T143-152) Bodhisattvas are characterized by the following 
factors: they have the high intention of doing good to all sentient 
beings, they introduce sentient beings to knowledge of everything, 
they know themselves perfectly, they have overcome all pride, their 
high intention is unswerving, they have a natural, unforced friendly 
love for all, the same awareness towards those friendly or inimical 
to them, and an infinite love (prema) for all beings, they express 
themselves in apt words and with a smiling face, their compassion 
has no limits, they are unfatigued by the burdens they have 
undertaken, their mental powers are indefatigable, they are 
insatiable to hear the dharma, they see their own faults and point 
out without anger the faults of others, they have the enlightenment- 
awareness constantly with them, they give without the notion of a 
reward, their ethical conduct does not depend on the condition of 


MAHAYANASAMGRAHA 473 


life they are in, their forbearance holds for everyone, their energy 
gathers all the roots of the beneficial, they practise meditations up 
to the imageless sphere without impediment, they are endowed with 
a wisdom which includes skill in means, their means are 
conformable to the four means of attracting others to the dharma 
respectfully, they live apart from the world and disdain its frivolities, 
they are not attracted to the Hinayana, they see the advantages of 
the Mahayana, they leave off bad friends and cultivate good friends, 
they perform all meditational practices, they do not abandon 
sentient beings in the good or bad destinies, their language is 
precise, they esteem the truth. 

The Bodhisattvas' high intention of doing good to all sentient 
beings is comprised by sixteen acts: (1) acts of successive 
noninterrupted effort; (2) acts free from perversions, (3) acts 
undertaken even without another's asking them, (4) imperturbable 
acts, (5) acts without interest in reward, (6) bodily and verbal acts 
conforming to the high intentions, (7) acts equally efficacious for 
the unhappy, happy, and those who are neither, (8) courageous 
acts, (9) acts which can't be turned back, (10) acts conformable to 
skillful means, (11) acts putting aside that which is to be put aside, 
(12) acts with the reflection on the enlightenment-awareness always 
present, (13) acts in conformity with the six perfections and the four 
means of attracting others to the dharma; (4) acts of effort towards 
fufillment in supporting good people, hearing the dharma, living 
apart from the world, abandoning bad discriminations, and acts of 
high quality in mental attention, (5) fulfilled acts in purity of 
infinite practices, getting special powers, and high quality in 
understanding, (16) acts proceeding to the highest, i.e., qualities 
helping attract people to the dharma, advice and teaching given 
without hesitation, uniting material interest with the dharma, and 
awarenesses without defilement. 


CHAPTER THREE 


1.(T153-154) Entry into the characteristics of that which can be 
known is through mental states impressed with the hearing of the 
dharma, which states are not to be confused with the store- 
consciousness. 

2-3.(T154-156) Elaboration of this definition as having primarily 


474 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


to do with hearing Mahayana texts and entering into the path of the 
Bodhisattva. 

4.(T156-157) Necessary in this process is fortifying the roots of 
the beneficial, in allowing the awareness of enlightenment to arise 
in three ways, in showing a continuous heedfulness directed at 
peace and insight. 

5.(T157-159) The three ways the awareness of enlightenment 
arises: "Countless human beings in countless universes reach 
ultimate enlightenment in each moment’; "It's for this intention that 
sentient beings practise giving and the other perfections"; "Sentient 
beings with even limited beneficial actions arrive after death at the 
bodily perfections of their choice". The conclusion in all three cases 
is "if they can, so can I." (Quotes 165.Mahaydnasitralamkara X.11 
as if a work by another author.) 

6.(T159-160) The Bodhisattvas reject the mental attentions 
customary with disciples and self-enlightened Buddhas. They give up 
all doubts as to the Mahayana. They give up the idea of factors and 
selves. They abandon all discriminations to arrive at a 
constructionfree knowledge. 

7.(E161-162) Description of the gradual entry of the Bodhisattva 
into understanding, starting with mental talk connected with 
hearing the Mahayana, then realizing that all words, objects, 
essential natures, and meaning of words are only nominal 
designations, then proceeding from this basis. Once it is realized 
that words, objects, essential natures and meaning of words are 
simply nominal designations because they have no objective 
character, the state of consciousness-only is reached. 

8.(T162-164) Elaboration of this process, which involves unity 
(consciousness-only), duality (as sign and the observation of a sign), 
and multiplicity, since these two are manifested in limitless ways. 
Uses the image of the serpent and the rope, but in a more subtle 
way than is usual: Because it doesn't exist, the serpent seen in the 
Tope is an illusion, but the rope itself, if one analyzes it according 
to its subtle aspects, is also an illusion since it can be perceived by 
different consciousnesses as being color, smell, taste, or tangible. In 
the same way, one finds out that word, object, essential nature, 
specifications, and essential nature and specifications together, are 
nonobjective, and one enters into the idea of consciousness-only. 
But then one must in turn reject the idea of consciousness-only 


MAHAYANASAMGRAHA 475 


itself. 

9.(T164-165) Nominal designations are the constructed; 
consciousness-only is the dependent; abandonment of even the idea 
of consciousness-only is the perfected, constructionfree knowledge. 

10.(T165-166) Factors, persons, religious statements, theses, brief 
expositions, more extended expositions, beings not yet purified, 
beings purified, conclusions, are all nothing but names. 

11.(T166-167) Entry into consciousness-only is entry into the 
characteristics of the knowable. This is the first Bodhisattva-stage, 
the awareness of the sameness of all sentient beings, the path of 
vision. 

12.(T167-169) Both a supramundane knowledge based on peace 
and higher vision, and a subsequently attained knowledge which is 
worldly inasmuch as it again makes use of concepts but only as 
means, enter into consciousness-only. This subsequently attained 
knowledge considers all phenomena arising from the storehouse 
consciousness as being like a magical creation. 

13.(T169-170) In the course of entry into consciousness-only, the 
four aids to penetration arise. 

14.(T171) Sustained practice of peace and higher vision is the 
spiritual path. 

15.(T171-174) What difference is there between the full 
understanding of the disciples and that of Bodhisattvas? The full 
understanding of Bodhisattvas is different as to its object of 
consciousness: as to its support, because it is based on great 
preparations in merit and knowledge; as to its penetration, since it 
penetrates not only the selflessness of personality, but also the 
selflessness of factors; as to its nirvana, since it involves only a 
nirvana which is based nowhere (apratisthitanirvana); as to its 
stages; as to its purification, since it suppresses not only the 
impressions of the obstruction which are defiling, but also the 
impressions of the obstructions of the knowable, and purifies the 
Buddha-fields; by being equally attentive to the aims of others as to 
"one's own"; by its birth, since it arises only in the Tathagata- 
lineage; by its accomplishments, and by its results: the ten powers, 
the special Buddha-factors, etc. 

16.(T174-175) (Quotes 165. Mahayanasttralamkara XIX, 47 as 
if a work by another author.) Since an "objective" object doesn't 
exist, the three essential natures (constructed, dependent, perfected) 


476 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


also don't exist. 

17.(T175-176) (Quotes a lost Yogacaravibhaga) The 
meditationally concentrated Bodhisattva sees that all reflections are 
only mind. Rejecting all identifications of an object, he understands 
that only those identifications of his exist. He realizes that the object 
perceived does not exist, then he realizes that by this fact the 
subject apprehender also does not exist. And so he reaches a state 
of nonapprehenson. 

18.(T176-179) (Quotes 165. Mahayanasiitralamkara V1, 6-10 as 
if a work by a different author.) 

(This Chapter of this treatise thus demonstrates that the final 
point of view, or nonpoint of view, of Yogacara, at least as 
conceived at its origin, is neither the consciousness-theory (which is 
purely preliminary), nor the idea of the three essential natures 
(which is a way of outlining the process of defilement to 
purification), nor even the idea of consciousness-only which follows 
from a knowledge of the three essential natures, but a 
constructionfree knowledge where "subject" and "consciousness" are 
equally as absent as "object" and "the perceived." ) 


CHAPTER FOUR: Cause and Effect of Entry (T180-195) 


CHAPTER FIVE: The Various Cultivations of the Cause and Effect 
(T196-211) 


CHAPTER SIX: Spiritual Training in Higher Virtue (T212-217 
CHAPTER SEVEN: Training in Higher Awareness (T218-231) 
CHAPTER EIGHT: Training in Higher Wisdom (T232-258) 
CHAPTER NINE: Abandoning the Fruits of the Three (T259-265) 
CHAPTER TEN: Knowledge of the Fruits (T266-345) 

171. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Dharmadharmatavibhaga 


The status of this text is discussed by Leslie Kawamura.*°° He 
finds that there are three texts in Tibetan, which he distinguishes as 


DHARMADHARMATAVIBHAGA 477 


Maitreya's prose text, Maitreya's karika text, and Vasubandhu's 
commentary text.*°” In all likelihood Maitreya was not an actual 
person, so we leave the question of authorship in this case open.°° 
Kawamura discusses the sources of our knowledge of this text. 
Stefan Anacker®” has published a summary (our "T" below) of 
Vasubandhu's commentary (distinct from the summary provided 
later on as our #198) in which he summarizes as well some of the 
contents of our Dharmadharmatavibhaga. We reproduce this minus 
the Sanskrit reconstructions of technical terms that he supplies.°'° 


Summary by Stefan Anacker 


(T27-28) "The provisional distinction is between dharmas, which 
have the characteristic of undergoing affliction, and dharmata, 
which has the characteristic of alleviation. The characteristic of 
"dharmas'", in contrast to dharmata, is the construction of that which 
was not....Dharmata, on the other hand, is the undifferentiated 
Suchness that lies behind all so-called objects apprehended, subjects 
apprehenders, things which can be designated and _ their 
designation." 

(T29) "..The correct investigation of a "dharma" rests on six 
aspects: its characteristic, the proof of this characteristic, its 
severalness and non-separatedness, its locus, its commonness and 
uncommonness, and the understanding of the non-being of the 
appearances of the object apprehended and the subject 
apprehender..." 

(T30) "...Another list for "the correct investigation of dharmata", 
which also rests on six aspects: its characteristic, its support, its 
penetration, its contact, its memory and understanding its nature." 

"Entry into revolution at the basis depends on ten aspects, and 
here we are introduced to a particularly impenetrable, on first sight 
at least, Maitreyanatha list: (1) its own-nature, (2) its domain, (3) 
the "persons" who undergo it, (4) its speciality, (5) its practice, (6) 
its basis, (7) its mental attention, (8) its use (9) its benefit, and 
(10) entry into it." 

(T30) "...Another _ list...characterize(s) non-discriminatory 
knowledge, stating that it is the non-mental attention to 
discriminations, having passed beyond all discriminations, putting 
to rest all discriminations, being non-discriminatory simply by its 


478 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


nature, and that it can be apprehended simply by being noted." 


172. AUTHOR UNKNOWN, Abhisamaydalamkara 


Estimates of the source of this text vary widely. Warder®"' dates 
it to "about the middle of the 3rd century A.D.", while Conze®”? says 
it "may possibly belong to the Sth century, if we can believe 
Taranatha's account". It is frequently claimed to be a work of 
"Maitreya", thus Asanhga. It is a summary of 
54.Paficavimsatiprajiaparamitastitra, which, in the words of Warder, 
"proceeds to set out the way, following the actual order of the 
Sutras, as if these were arranged in such a systematic fashion." 
This work has been edited a number of times, including the edition 
by Rama Sastri Tripathin in Bibliotheca Indo-Tibetica 2 (Varanasi 
1977), our "E", and has been translated by Edward Conze, our "T'.54 


(E3) Two introductory verses of benediction. 

(E3; T4) The purpose of this work is to explain the way to 
knowledge of all aspects. Remembering these siitras one can 
satisfactorily understand the tenfold teaching concerning the 
dharma. 

(E4-5; 14-7) There are eight perfections of wisdom 
(prajfiaparamita) to be understood: (A) awareness of all the aspects, 
(B) awareness of all the paths, (C) complete awareness, (D) 
enlightenment concerning all the aspects, (E) attainment of the 
summit, (F) gradual attainment, (G) instantaneous attainment, (H) 
the dharmakaya. 

(E5-6; T9-12) (A) Awareness of All the Aspects. (1) The arising 
of awareness is the desire for right enlightenment for others' sakes. 
(2) Instructions concerning the path, the truths, the three jewels of 
enlightenment, absence of attachment, persistence and acceptance 
of the path, awareness by five eyes, the qualities of the six higher 
faculties, the path of vision and the path of practice. Twenty kinds 
of disciples are identified: those with dull faculties, with keen 
faculties, who have achieved faith, who have achieved correct views, 
two kinds reborn again and again, those, with one interval, those 
who are liberated during intermediate existence, those who are 


ABHISAMAYALAMKARA 479 


liberated as soon as they are reborn, doers, nondoers, those who 
have gone to the akanistha gods, three kinds of those who go by 
leaps, those who have gone to the highest sphere, who are satisfied 
in this life, who see with their bodies, and those self-enlightened. 

(E6-8; T13-19) (3) The aids to penetration, viz., heat, summit, 
patience and the highest dharma, are classed into weak, medium or 
strong types depending on their objects, their aspects, their causes 
and accomplishments. These four also correspond to four sorts of 
conceptual construction. The aids to penetration are assisted by 
thoughtful attention, correct advice concerning lack of an essential 
nature, etc., and abandonment of attitudes contrary to these. 

(4) The aids to progress. The lineage is the basis of six factors 
conducive to achievement, of antidotes, of abandoning, of 
overlooking the difference between (the last two), of wisdom 
involving compassion, of states not attained by disciples, of helpful 
activities, and of effortless awareness. Lineages are not correctly 
viewed as different, for the factor-element is not actually 
differentiated. But since the differences among factors are based on 
it the differentiation can be understood. 

(S) Supporting objects comprise all factors. Good objects belong 
to either the worldly or the higher-worldly realm. The former have, 
and the latter lack, contaminants. Those without contaminants 
include both conditioned and unconditioned factors, as well as those 
shared with disciples and those confined to sages. 

(E8-13; T19-29) (6) The program of self-existence involves three 
great qualities: trying to improve all beings, forsaking (false views) 
and achievement (of nirvana). 

(7) Preparation (lit. "putting on the armor") involves six times, six 
ways and the six perfections of giving, etc. 

(8) Setting out to follow the Mahayana involves meditative 
trances and immaterial attainments, giving, etc., the path, loving 
kindness, etc., objectless awareness, the threefold purity, indication, 
six higher faculties and awareness of all the aspects. 

(9) Preparation of equipment. The steps in the process of setting 
out include sympathy, the six perfections (giving, etc.), peace with 
vision and the path that combines them, skill in the method, 
awareness, merit, the path, mystical verses, the ten stages and the 
antidotes. The ten stages of moral perfection are described at 
length, and the antidotes are assigned to the path of vision or 


480 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


practice. 

(10) Deliverance, understood as (a) goal, (b) sameness, (c) the 
purpose of beings, (d) the absence of exertion, (e) free from 
extremes, (f) the mark of attainment, (g) the knowledge of all 
aspects, and (h) relating to the path. 

(E14-18; T31-43) (B) Awareness of All the Paths. The path of the 
disciples involves the four noble truths and the aids to penetration. 
The path of the self-enlightened, who do not need instruction by 
others and who can bring something to another's mind without 
speaking, transcends the grasping of objects though not of their 
subject. In the path of the Bodhisattva there is the path of vision, 
involving the moments of patience and knowledge as understood 
relating to teachings of the four truths. There is also the path of 
spiritual practice, involving weak, medium or strong resolve for 
one's own and others' purposes. The process of transformation of 
merit into the cause of liberation is reviewed. It involves avoidance 
of contaminants and of perverted views, isolation, remembrance of 
the Buddha's virtues, a spiritual method, signlessness, attention to 
the Buddha's advice, transcendence of the world and attainment of 
great merit. Completion of the path is considered as to its essential 
nature, its excellence, its noninvolvement, its virtues, and how 
success is gained. The various forms of purity thus gained are 
reviewed. 

(E19-21; T44-48) (C) Complete Awareness of the perfection of 
wisdom is not understood in nirvana, in this world nor in between 
without application of skilful means. One needs to understand the 
emptiness of the aggregates, the factors, and the limbs of 
enlightenment such as giving. The antidotes to misconceptions 
about these include nonegoity, helping others to that, and the 
destruction of all attachment that occurs when all factors are 
understood to be of one nature. 

There are ten kinds of things one who seeks understanding needs 
to reflect on: the aggregates, their impermanence, their being 
neither complete nor incomplete, the reversal of one's way of life 
since he is nonattached, immutability, nonagency, the difficulty of 
three aspects of training, consideration of the attainment of results, 
of unconditionedness, and of seven insightful analogies. 

The path of vision is divided into sixteen ways of understanding 
the aggregates: as neither eternal nor noneternal, as beyond the 


ABHISAMAYALAMKARA 481 


extremes, as pure, as neither arisen nor ceased, as like space, as 
without pollution, as free from embracement, as essentially 
inexpressible, as incommunicable, as imperceptible, as absolutely 
pure, as free from frustration, as the destruction of calamity, as 
direct awareness of the fruit, as free from relation to signs, and as 
the nonproduction of any awareness and talk of entities. 

(D) Enlightenment Concerning All Aspects. Aspects (Gkdra) are 
topics in the understanding of entities, and are of three kinds briefly 
classed into 173 sorts. After listing the attributes of those worthy of 
studying these teachings, some twenty applications of the teachings 
are identified and the virtues, faults and features of the training 
explained. 

These features are classified as kinds of awareness, the specific 
features of the training, the activity of that training, and its essential 
nature. Kinds of awareness are further divided as regarding 
omniscience, the paths, and the features comprised among them. 
Specific features of the training are classified under the four noble 
truths, and the style and nature of the training are described. 

(E25-29; T64-76) The means to liberation are divided into five: 
faith in the Buddha, the dharma and the order, energy in giving, 
etc., mindfulness of the accomplishment of one's intentions, 
concentration, and wisdom which is the knowledge of all the factors 
in all their aspects. 

The four aids to penetration are reviewed, and it is explained 
how to tell what has been accomplished at each of the stages of 
heat, summit, patience and highest dharma. A similar review is 
provided for the sixteen stages on the path of vision and the eight 
in the path of practice. 

Since all factors are unreal like dream-objects the Bodhisattva 
understands that becoming and quiescence should not be 
distinguished; no traces are produced from this attitude of purity. 
Ten features of that awareness are listed. 

(E30-36; T77-92) (E) Attainment of the Summit. One who attains 
the summit practises a yoga classified in twelve ways, the first of 
which is that one sees all factors as appearances in dream. One's 
growth is classified in sixteen ways. The dharma thus gained gives 
one stability of awareness, concentration. 

This is now considered first according to the path of vision, then 
according to the path of practice. According to the path of vision the 


482 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


grasped (i.e., objects) are misunderstood as relating to activity and 
to withdrawal, each of these in nine ways. The grasper too is 
misunderstood, in nine ways each, as to his reality when viewed by 
ordinary folk and as to nominal reality when viewed by the noble 
ones. In fact both kinds of grasper are empty, falsely conceived, and 
one who knows the extinction of his impurities and that no future 
impurities will occur is called "enlightened". The path of practice is 
reviewed in a similar fashion. 

(E37; T93) (F) Gradual Attainment involves giving, wisdom, 
memory of the Buddha, the dharma and the order, and the 
realization that no factors have an essential nature. 

(E37; T94-95) (G) Instantaneous Attainment, the perfection of 
wisdom, occurs when at a single moment the understanding of the 
maturation of the karma of all remaining pure factors occurs, so that 
one realizes that all factors are absent like the objects of dreams, 
while not contrasting these dream-objects with the seeing of them. 

(E38-44; T96-104) (H) The Dharmakaya. Reaching attainment 
one has the essential body of a sage, featuring twenty-one marks: 
the limbs of enlightenment, the boundless states, enlightenment, 
nine trances, ten meditative devices, eight kinds of senses of 
mastery, nonpassion, awareness of vows, the higher faculties, the 
discriminations, four kinds of completeness, ten controls, ten 
powers, four grounds for confidence, three kinds of establishment 
of mindfulness, three kinds of nonloss, an unbewildered nature, the 
uprooting of proclivities, great compassion for people, eighteen 
factors specific to a sage, and knowledge of all the aspects. The 
differences between the understandings of disciples, jinas and a 
Buddha are explained. 

The enjoyment-body (sambhogakaya) of a sage features thirty- 
two features and eighty more additional signs, such as lines 
representing a wheel on hands or feet, webbed fingers and toes, 
golden skin, a tall body, blue eyes, deep voice, etc. 

The magical body (nirmanak@ya) of a Bodhisattva is the body in 
which he carries on doing good work until the end of the universe. 
Some twenty-seven ways in which such a Bodhisattva behaves in 
helping others are detailed. 

(E44; T106) The eight topics (1-8 above) can be summed up 
under six, or even three, headings: the three kinds of awareness (A- 
C), the four stages which are the causes of enlightenment (D-G), 


ABHISAMAYALAMKARA 483 


and the result--the dharmakaya (H). 


VASUBANDHU 


Perhaps no other figure in the history of Indian philosophy, with 
the possible exception of Samkaracarya, has provided so much 
historical discussion as Vasubandhu. The author of what is recognized 
as the outstanding available summary of Abhidharma teachings, the 
173. AbhidharmakoSa, as well as of the exposition of the basic 
teachings of one of the major Mahayana schools, Yogacara, in his 202. 
Trimsika and 203. Vimsatika, Vasubandhu is said to have been the 
younger brother of Asanga and subjected to severe criticism by 
Samghabhadra, both of whom, if these accounts are to be believed, 
lived during the fourth century. Despite this, estimates of 
Vasubandhu's date have ranged from the second to the sixth centuries, 
and there has been heated debate over whether the Abhidharma 
author was or was not identical to the Yogacarin. 

Fortunately, however, we now have a plausible account of 
Vasubandhu's life and date provided us by Stefan Anacker. We do not 
suppose, of course, that given the amount of discussion generated that 
anyone's solution to the problems of Vasubandhu's date and 
authorship will be entirely convincing to all parties. However, rather 
than attempt to review all the arguments in the debate,*'* we have 
chosen here merely to provide in this introductory account excerpts 
from Anacker's attractive and well-documented description of 
Vasubandhu's life.*"® 

"Vasubandhu was born in Purusapura, present-day Peshawar, in 
what was then the kingdom of Gandhara, around the year 316 
A.D...His father was a Brahmana of the Kausika gotra, and his mother 
was named Virificl. The couple already had a previous son, later called 
Asanga, and a third, nicknamed Virificivatsa, was to follow. 
Vasubandhu's father was a court priest."*”” 

"_..Vasubandhu was born one year after his older brother Asaiiga 
became a Buddhist monk...Vasubandhu...entered the Sarvastivadin 
order, and was studying primarily the scholastic system of the 
Vaibhasikas...His main teacher seems to have been a certain 
Buddhamitra." 

"In time, however, grave doubts about the validity and relevance of 


484 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Vaibhasika metaphysics began to arise in Vasubandhu. At this time, 
perhaps through the brilliant teacher Manoratha, he came into contact 
with the theories of the Sautrantikas...Vasubandhu finally decided to 
go to Kashmir to investigate the Vaibhasika teachings more exactly." 

"Bu-ston says that Vasubandhu in Kashmir entered the school of 
Saighabhadra. But it is unlikely that this intellectually acute and 
cantankerous individual assumed the professorship at that time, for, 
from what both Paramartha and Hsiian-tsang tell us, Vasubandhu and 
Sanghabhadra seem to have been about the same age. It is, however, 
more than likely that it was the school Saighabhadra was himself 
attending as a student, and this is in fact attested by P'u-k'uang. He 
says that the main master there was the teacher of Sanghabhadra..." 

"Vasubandhu studied in Kashmir for four years, probably from 
about 342 to 346. He was however no docile student, but rather in his 
increasing frustration with the over-intellectual and category-ridden 
dogmatics of the Kashmirian masters, frequently voiced his own 
refutations of many of their points. The master...disturbed by the 
obstreperous student...told Vasubandhu privately that he should 
return to Gandhara before his ‘uncultured students’, among whom one 
can well imagine the sharp-tongued Samghabhadra, found out and 
attempted to harm him...” 

"Vasubandhu returned to Purusapura...Vasubandhu supported 
himself by lecturing on Buddhism before the general public...At the 
close of each day's lecture on the Vaibhasika system, Vasubandhu 
composed a verse which summed up his exposition for the day...So in 
time he composed over six hundred verses, which gave an extensive 
outline of the entire Vaibhasika system. These constitute the 
Abhidharmakoéa...Vasubandhu sent it...to his old teachers in Kashmir, 
(who) exulted that Vasubandhu had come over to their side... They 
were disturbed only because Vasubandhu in his treatise so often used 
terms such as ‘kila' (‘it is claimed’) and ‘ity ahuh' (‘so they say')." 

"As a matter of fact, during this entire time, Vasubandhu was 
working on his real project, his autocommentary on the Kosa, which 
contains a thoroughgoing critique of Vaibhasika dogmatics from a 
Sautrantika viewpoint...For the subsequent furious indignation of the 
orthodox Vaibhasikas, we need not rely on traditional accounts only; 
it is amply attested by the relentless invective employed by 
contemporary Vaibhasika writers such as Saighabhadra...Vasubandhu 
had thus at a fairly early age achieved a certain notoriety...” 


VASUBANDHU 485 


"In the years directly following the composition of the Kosa, 
Vasubandhu seems to have spent much time in travelling from place 
to place. It is certain that he stayed for a time at Sakala, the modern 
Sialkot..." 

"Around 350, Samudragupta completed his lighming-quick 
conquest of north India...It was, in all probability, subsequent to that 
event that Vasubandhu, as well as his teachers Buddhamitra and 
Manoratha, decided to move to Ayodhya...Hsiian-tsang later saw the 
hall in Ayodhya where Vasubandhu preached to ‘kings and many 
eminent men'." 

"Vasubandhu had, up to this time, but little regard for the Yogacara 
treatises of his elder brother...Asaiga heard about this attitude of his 
brother, and decided to attempt to open him up to the Mahayana. He 
sent two of his students with Mahayana texts to Vasubandhu..." 

"Vasubandhu seems to have been quite overwhelmed by Mahayana 
literature...In view of the fact that they were the texts that converted 
him to Mahayana, Vasubandhu's commentaries on the 
Aksayamatinirdesasiitra and the Dagabhimika may be his earliest 
Mahayana works. These were followed by a series of commentaries on 
other Mahayana sutras and treatises..." 

"Since the output of Vasubandhu's Mahayana works is 
prodigious...he could have been a very famous Mahayana master by 
the year 360, the approximate date in which Kumarajiva took 
instruction from Bandhudatta in Kucha. By this time, Vasubandhu 
could easily have written those works which Bandhudatta transmitted 
to his brilliant pupil..." 

"The year 376 brings Candragupta II, Vikramaditya, to the throne 
of the Gupta Empire...Around the year 383, at his eighth birthday, the 
crown prince Govindagupta Baladitya was placed by the Emperor 
under the tutelage of Vasubandhu. The Empress Dhruvadevi also went 
to Vasubandhu to receive instruction..." 

"In his old age, Vasubandhu seems to have taken up the wandering 
life again. Some of his last works are known to have been written in 
Sakala and in Kaugambi. Kaugambi, for instance, is the place where he 
wrote his Twenty and Thirty Verses, and Hstiang-tsang saw the old 
brick tower there, near the ancient Sangharama of Ghosira, where 
these famous expositions of Yogacara were written." 

"Around the year 391, the consecration of Govindagupta as "Young 
King" took place. He and his mother begged Vasubandhu to settle 


486 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


down in Ayodhya and accept life-long royal support. Vasubandhu 
accepted the offer... The master was creative even at his advanced age, 
and more than a match for Vasurata, the Young King's grammarian 
brother-in-law, in his favorite sport of debate...But...debate was to him 
mainly upaya: if it could lead to no one's interest in Mahayana, he 
would not engage in it. Thus, when Sanghabhadra, who had written 
his two great treatises, one of which is a furious denunciation of the 
KoSa Bhdsya, challenged Vasubandhu to defend the KoSa's statements, 
and was invited to come to court and debate by the jealous Vasurata, 
Vasubandhu told his pupils that he could see no good reason for such 
a debate, but diplomatically sent the official answer the Sanghabhadra 
would indeed be hard to defeat...The debate never took 
place...Sanghabhadra in fact died shortly after." 

"Vasubandhu did not long survive Sanghabhadra. In the eightieth 
year of his life, c. 396, he died..." 

Over thirty works are attributed to Vasubandhu by tradition for 
which we have no special reason to doubt his authorship. A good many 
of these are commentaries on Mahayana siitras and sGstras, most of 
them available now only in Chinese or Tibetan translations if at all. In 
keeping with the putative chronology provided by Anacker's account 
just provided, we shall place the Abhidharma works previous to those 
Mahayana sutras, and the remaining, Yogacara works at the end, with 
the TrisvabhavanirdeSa last in keeping with Anacker's estimate. 


173. VASUBANDHU, Abhidharmakosa 


The Kosa was first known to modern readers in two Chinese 
translations, one by Paramartha in the sixth century, the other by 
Hstian-tsang in the seventh. There are also two Tibetan translations, 
one by Jinamitra and the other by Srikittaraksita, dating from the ninth 
century. Rahula Sankrtyayana discovered the Sanskrit text at Ngor in 
Tibet in 1935 and made photocopies; these are the basis for more 
recent editions. Louis de la Vallee Poussin translated Hsiian-tsang's 
Chinese into French‘ and there are various partial translations.5"? In 
this summary "E" references are to the edition by Swami Dwarikadas 
Shastri,°?° whereas "T" references are to Leo M. Pruden's four-volume 


English translation of Poussin's French, op. cit., numbered 
consecutively. 


Summary by Stefan Anacker 
CHAPTER ONE: Realms 


1. (E4; T56) Homage to the Buddha, who destroys all blindness. 

2.(E11-13; T56) Abhidharma is defined as pure wisdom with 
accompaniments. It may also be used for impure wisdom or even for 
treatises which result in pure wisdom. 

3.(E14; T57) The only way to lay to rest the defilements that cause 
worldly wandering is to investigate the factors, and it is for this 
investigation the Buddha taught Abhidharma. 

4.(E16; T58) All conditioned factors except those of the path are 
contaminating because defilements adhere to them. 

5.(E18-19; T59) The three unconditioned factors--space, calculated 
and uncalculated cessation--are noncontaminating. 

6.(E20-22;T59-60) Calculated cessations are separate disjunctions. 
Uncalculated cessation is the complete end to arising. 

7.(E25-26; T61) Conditioned factors can all be subsumed under the 
five aggregates. They are temporal, the objects of discourse, exist, and 
involve actual objects. 

8.(E28-29; T62-63) Contaminating factors are grasping aggregates. 
They are harmful, being frustrating, originating, worldly, the topic of 
opinions, existent. 

9.(E30; T63) Material form comprises the five sense-organs, five 
objects, and unmanifest form. The loci of the awarenesses of these are 
subtle matter, visual, etc. 

10.(E32-35; T64-66) There are two (or twenty) material bases. 
Sounds are eightfold, tastes sixfold, smell fourfold, and tangibles are 
of eleven sorts. 

11.(E38; T67) Unmanifest material form occurs in a series 


dependent on the great elements which is distracted or unaware.! 


1.Unmanifest form is used to explain the karmic retribution of 
one who has instigated an action. Someone who prompts 
someone else to murder engenders an unmanifest form of karma 
as soon as he prompts; the unmanifest form "comes to maturity" 
when the other person actually commits the murder. 


488 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


12.((E43; T68-69) The great material elements are earth, water, 
fire and wind. They function respectively as supporting, humidifying, 
heating and motion. 

13.(E43; T69) As commonly used "earth", "water", "fire", and "wind" 
refer to colors and shapes. 

14.(E47-48; 172) Feelings are experiencings. Conceptual 
identifications are the grasping of signs. 

15.(E48-50; T73) The aggregates of feelings, identifications, and 
conditioning factors, together with unmanifest form and the 
unconditioned factors, belong to the sense-basis of factors 
(dharmayatana), the realm of factors. 

16.(E50; T74) Consciousness is the awareness of something 
manifesting (prativijfiapti). It is the mental organ; it is seven elements, 
six consciousnesses plus mind. 

17.(E51; T75) The term "mind" (manas) is used for any occurrence 
of the six types of consciousnesses which immediately afterwards gives 
rise to a mental-consciousness-moment. Eighteen sensory domains are 
enumerated to support there being just six types of consciousness. 

18.(E54; T76) All conditioned factors are included in an aggregate, 
a sense-basis, or an element. 

19.(E55; T75) Vaibhasika: Though the organs of sight, hearing, and 
smelling are double, they each count as only one sensory domain. 

20.(E56-62; T77-80) On the etymology of "skandha", "ayatana" and 
"dhatu". 

21.(E64; T81) Feelings and identifications are designated as 
Separate aggregates because they are the causes of dispute, of samsdra, 
and because of order. 

22.(E65-66; T81-83) The unconditioned can't be classified under 
"aggregates", since they aren't that sort of thing. The order in which the 
aggregates are listed reflects their relative grossness or subtlety, their 
defiling capacities, and their relative range in the four realms. 

23.(E67-68; T84) The five Sensory consciousnesses have objects 
which are simultaneously present. The arrangement of the sense-fields 
has to do with the range and rapidity of their functioning, the eye 
having a longer range and greater rapidity than the ear, the ear than 
the nose, etc. 

24.(E69; T85) Only one sense-field is called a material basis 
because of its excellence and predominance. Only one sense-field is 
called a "basis of factors" because of what it includes. 


tae 


aba 


— 


OA ES aghast MN AN, apcaesani TTI Hi, htt in 


sat pnt 


<9 


ABHIDHARMAKOSA 489 


25-26. (E70-72; T86-87) The rest of the large number of factors that 
the Buddha refers to fall among either the material or conditioning 
aggregate. 

27.(E72-765; T87-88) Examples of how other factors can be 
classified as aggregates, senses and elements. 

28.(E77-78; T88-89) The element of space is, according to some, 
light or dark. The consciousness element is contaminating, being the 
locus of birth. 

29a-b.(E79-81; T89-92) Only one material element is visible. Ten 
material elements are resistant. Eight elements are neutral (those 
excluding matter and sound). 

29cd-30.(E81-87; T92-93) The rest of the elements can be of three 
sorts, good, bad or neutral. All of the elements exist in the realm of 
desire; fourteen exist in the material realm (excluding smell, taste, the 
smell- and taste-awarenesses). 

31.(E87; T95-96) In the material realm all the material sensory 
domains are absent. In that realm occur three elements--the mind 
element, the mental consciousness element, and the factor element. 
They can be contaminating or not. 

32.(E88; T96-97) Five awareness elements involve initial and 
sustained thought. The mind, mental consciousness, and the factor 
elements involve three different combinations of initial and sustained 
thought. The rest of the elements involve no thought. 

33.(E89-90; T97) The five awarenesses are constructionfree, not 
involving defining and memory. Those two kinds of construction affect 
any distracted mentality, be it wise or mnemonic. 

34.(E90-91; T98) Seven elements of awareness plus one part of the 
factor-element have supporting objects. The seven plus the factor- 
element and sounds are never appropriated by a body. The remaining 
nine sensory domains are sometimes appropriated, sometimes not. 

35.(E92-95; T99-101) Among the ten material elements, the 
tangible element consists, in part, of the great elements and in part of 
material form derived from these great elements. The remaining nine 
material elements are only derivative. 

36.(E95-96; T102) Four elements can cut or be cut, burn or be 
burned, weigh or be weighed. There is disagreement about details. 

37.(E97-99; T103-104) The five internal sense-bases are the result 
of karmic maturation and grow through nourishment. Sound is never 
the result of karmic maturation. 


490 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


38.(E100-103; T105-106) Only one sensory domain grasps reality: 
the unconditioned (which is part of the sensory domain of mental 
cognizables), because only it is permanent. 

39.(E104-107; T107-109) Twelve of the sensory elements are 
personal--the twelve excluding those six that are objects of 
consciousness. 

The sensory element called "factor(-element)" is homogeneous. The 
remaining ones are partially homogeneous. 

40.(E109-110; T112-114) Fifteen elements are abandoned in 
meditational concentration; the last thirteen are of three kinds. 
Undefiled and material factors are not abandoned by the path of 
vision. 

41.(E112-114; T113-114) The term "view" (drsti) is used for the 
visual organ as well as for eight views which form parts of the factor 
element. The five sensory consciousnesses are not views, as there is no 
judgment in them made after deliberation. 

42.(E113-114; T114-115) Vaibhasika: It is the eye which sees 
visibles, not the visual consciousness. For when the visible is 
obstructed, or the eye, there is nothing seen. 

43.(119-120; T119) Vaibhasika: The eye, ear, and mind perceive 
their objects without coming directly in touch with them. This is not 
the case with the other three organs of sense. 

44.(E123-125; T122-125) The three organs starting with the 
olfactory grasp an object of equal size. The objects of the five sensory 
consciousnesses occur simultaneously with their consciousness, but 
the mental consciousness may have a past, present, or future object of 
consciousness. 

45.(E126-127; T125) Since a consciousness depends both on the 
object and the organ, why is only the organ designated as its support? 
Because the consciousness changes according to the organ. 

46.(E128-129; T127-128) There is no inferiority or superiority as 
regards different kinds of organs or consciousnesses in the same 
experiential sphere. 

47.(E130-131; T128-129) Sometimes the mental consciousness of 
a psychophysical complex may be in a superior experiential sphere to 
the other consciousnesses--for instance, when it is meditationally 
concentrated. 

48.(E131-132; T129-130) Everything perceived by the other 
consciousnesses is discerned by the mental consciousness. The 


ABHIDHARMAKOSA 491 


unconditioned factors (I, 4-5) are eternal. There are twenty-two 
faculties, factors which have a predominance for the psychophysical 
complex. They are the faculties of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, tactile 
body, mind (meaning all six consciousnesses), femininity, masculinity, 
vitality, satisfaction, frustration, contentedness, irritation, equanimity, 
faith, energy, mindfulness, meditation, insight, coming to know what 
wasn't known, understanding, and perfect knowledge. (For the 
definitions of these see Chapter Two.) 


CHAPTER TWO: The Faculties 


1.(E135-138; T153-155) Vaibhasika: Five faculties predominate in 
respect of four things, and four in respect to two; five and eight with 
regard to affliction and purification. 

2.(E140; T155-156) The faculties which are sense-organs are really 
predominant in relation to the five sensory consciousnesses, and the 
faculty of mind (cf. I, 17) is predominant in regard to mental 
consciousness. 

3.(E141; T156-157) Vitality, feelings and the five faculties 
beginning with faith are predominant in maintaining life, in afflictions 
and purifications. 

4.(E141; T157) Coming to know what wasn't known, 
understanding and perfect knowledge predominate in respect to 
liberation. 

5.(E142; T158) The faculties are the loci of awareness and what 
conceptualizes, maintains, afflicts, prepares and purifies them. 

6.(E143; T159) Alternatively, there are fourteen (positive) 
faculties, comprising the loci of activity and the arising, maintenance 
and-experiencing of those loci; the rest (negative) function similarly in 
regard to nirvana. 

7.(E145-146; T150-161) All the information regarding the faculties 
which is provided by II, 7-19, 30, 60-61 and IV, 8-127 may be 
diagrammed as follows: 


492 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Table I 


(The following abbreviations are used: 

A = internal 

B = noncontaminating (potentially linked to proclivities) 

C = noncontaminating (never linked to proclivities) 

D = can be either good or potentially linked to proclivities or not 
liable to be linked to proclivities (e.g., when meditationally 
concentrated) 

E = both in good and bad states, can be retribution for acts 

F = retribution for a good act in a good state, for a bad act in a 
bad state 

G = always retribution for a bad act when retribution at all 

H = never retribution 

I = always ethically neutral 

J = always good 

K = can be good, bad, or neutral, i-e., can belong to any ethical 
category 

L = not retribution when good, bad, or unobstructed/neutral 
other than retribution 

M = always retribution 

N = always retribution for a good act when retribution at all. 

Contaminated states are "bad", being frustrating, but are not 
necessarily "bad" in the sense of giving rise to further frustrations. 
Anything which comes about as a result of retribution is necessarily 
ethically neutral. Whatever arises from a conceptual construction is 
never ethically neutral, and whatever arises from interest is never 
retribution.) 


(1) Faculty of the Eye ABFI 
(2) Faculty of the Ear ABFI 
(3) Faculty of the Nose ABFI 
(4) Faculty of the Tongue ABFI 
(5) Faculty of the Tactile Body ABFI 
(6) Faculty of Mind ADFI 
(7) Faculty of Masculinity ABFI 


(8) Faculty of Femininity ABFI 


ABHIDHARMAKOSA 493 
(9) Faculty of Vitality BFMI 
(10) Faculty of Satisfaction KLN 
(11) Faculty of Frustration BGKL 
(12) Faculty of Contentedness KLN 
(13) Faculty of Irritation B @rH) 
(14) Faculty of Equanimity DKN 
(15) Faculty of Faith DHJ 
(16) Faculty of Energy DHJ 
(17) Faculty of Mindfulness DHJ 
(18) Faculty of Meditation DHJ 
(19) Faculty of Insight DHJ 
(20) Coming to Know What is Not Yet Known CHJ 
(21) Faculty of Understanding IHJ 
(22) Faculty of Perfect Knowledge IHJ 


The faculty of frustration is any disagreeable bodily feeling, and the 
faculty of satisfaction any agreeable one. 

8.(E146-147; T161-162) The faculty of irritation is any disagreeable 
mental feeling, and contentedness is its opposite. Equanimity is neither 
agreeable nor disagreeable, and may be either bodily or mental. 

For 9-19, cf. Table I 

22.(E180-181; T185) In the material realm an "atom" (provided it 
is without sound or faculties) comprises eight substances, nine if the 
tactual organ is involved, ten if another organ is. 

23.(E180-181; T185) Awarenesses and accompanying mental 
factors, meaning motivating dispositions, feelings, and cognitions, 
necessarily arise together. All conditioned factors arise with the 
characteristics of being general. 

24.(E186-188; T189) The generally conditioning factors are feeling, 
volition, identification, interest, contact, intellection, memory, 
attention, resolve, and concentration. 

25.(E177-191; T191) The good permeating factors are faith, 
heedfulness, tranquillity, equanimity, shame, modesty, absence of 
greed, understanding, noninjury, and energy. 

26.(E191-194; T193-195) The defiled permeating factors are 
delusion, heedlessness, idleness, lack of confidence, lethargy, and 
agitation. Shamelessness and disregard are the bad permeating 
factors. 

27.(E194; T196) The afflicting permeating factors are anger, 
vengefulness, craftiness, envy, spite, hypocrisy, selfishness, deceit, 


494 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


arrogance, and violence. 

28.(E195; T197-198) Vaibhasika: Since initial and sustained 
thought coexist with every awareness in the realm of desire (see I, 30), 
every good nonmeditative awareness is accompanied by at least 
twenty-two accompanying mental factors. 

29-30.(E197-198; T198-199) It is explained which accompanying 
mental factors go with bad awarenesses and which with neutral 
awarenesses. 

31.(E199; T199) In the first meditational state the bad 
accompanying mental factors no longer exist, nor do regret nor 
sleepiness. In the state between the first and second meditational 
states, initial thought drops out. From the second meditational state 
on, sustained thought is dropped. 

32.(E201-204; T200-202) Shame has to do with an emotion felt 
internally in regard to something done which is bad; modesty is an 
emotion felt in reference to the outer world. 

33.(E204-207; T202-204) Vaibhasika: Initial and sustained thought 
are the grossness and subtlety of awareness. 

What is the difference between pride (mana) and arrogance 
(mada)? Pride is an inflation of awareness. Arrogance is an exaltation 
and abolition of awareness in regard to "one's own" factors. 

34.(E208-209; T205) "Citta", "manas", and "vijfiana" are synonyms 
(all meaning awareness). 

35-36.(E209-211; T206-207) Vaibhasika: Among the motivating 
dispositions dissociated from awareness are possession, which makes 
for acquisition (see II, 23), and nonpossession, which makes for 
dissociation, loss of possession. 

37-39.(E219-224; T212-215) More details about possession. 

40.(E224-226; T215-217) Vaibhasika: The state of one who is 
separate from dharma is equivalent to nonpossession of the path. 

41a.(E229; T221) Vaibhasika: Homogeneity within a lifetime is 
another kind of dissociated factor. 

41b-42.(E233-236; T221-224) In nonideation trance the awareness 
and mental states cease; one practising it experiences only karmic 
maturation in the Brhatphala heaven. It presupposes entrance into the 
fourth meditative trance state by one desiring liberation. It is clear, 
and its karma is completely worked off in the next life. It is not 
attained by noble persons. It is experienced at one time. 

43.(E236-238; T225-226) Cessation-trance is like the nonideation 


ABHIDHARMAKOSA 495 


trance in several respects. However, cessation-trance constitutes the 
summit of existence, and the maturation of its karma is of two sorts or 
neutral. Nobles, not ordinary folk, can gain it by effort. 

44.(E238-248; T226-233) Cessation-trance is obtained at 
enlightenment, not before. The two trances (nonideation and 
cessation) occur in the realm of desire and the material realm, but 
one's first cessation-trance must occur as a human. 

45a.(E248-253; T233-238) Vitality is the life-force, the locus of heat 
and consciousness. 

45b-46a.(E253-256; T240-247) Conditioned factors are 
characterized by birth, aging, duration and termination. Also by birth 
of birth, aging of aging, etc. 

47-48.(E270-277; T250-254) Vaibhasika: The collection of words, 
collection of phrases, and collection of syllables are dissociated factors. 
They occur in living beings in the realm of desire and the material 
realm as outflows and neutral, as does also homogeneity. 

48.(E277-279; T278-279) There are six kinds of causes: efficient 
cause, simultaneous cause, homogeneous cause, connected cause, 
pervasive cause, and retributory cause. 

50.(E277-278; T255) All factors are efficient causes of everything 
except themselves. Simultaneous causes include the elements, 
awareness and its companions, marks and things marked--they are 
each others' effects. 

51.(E283-284; T257-258) Companions of awareness include 
mental factors, the two restraints and their marks. 

52.(E291-300; T262-268) Homogeneous causes are when cause 
and effect belong to similar group and state: thus good factors give rise 
to good factors, etc. 

53.(E303-307; T269-272) Associated causes are only awarenesses 
and mental factors which have the same support. 

54.(E308-310; T273-274) Pervasive causes are defiled factors, 
which arise in every instance of defiled states. Only good and bad 
factors susceptible to being linked with defilements are retributory 
causes. 

55.(E316-317; T277-278) The unconditioned has neither a cause 
nor an effect. 

56-60.(E327-340) T286-296) Discussion of which kinds of results 
accrue from the six kinds of causes, and when. 

61.(E341-342; T296-297) There are four kinds of conditions. 


496 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


62.(E342-349; T297-303) Except for the very last one, awarenesses 
and mental concomitants are the directly antecedent conditions. 

63-64.(E350-3521; T304-306) There is always a plurality of causes 
and conditions making for the existence of any factor. Thus there is no 
unique cause like God. If there were a unique cause for all events, all 
events would occur at the same time. 

65.(E355-356; T308-309) Causal relations among the great 
elements and derived factors. 

66-72.(E357-372; T310-315) Classification of awarenesses and 
mental factors in the various realms, and which came before and after 
which. 

73.(E372-376; T323-324) At conception in the womb, in 
meditation, in detachment, at the end of detachment, and upon 
developing the good roots, awarenesses arise which never arose before 
in the series. 


CHAPTER THREE: The World 


1-3.(E379-383; T365-367) The realm of desire includes those in 
hells, ghosts, animals, humans and six kinds of gods--twenty states in 
all. The material realm is divided into four meditational states. The 
immaterial realm is not a state, but has four varieties as well. There the 
stream of awarenesses depends on homogeneity and vitality. 

4.(E387-392; T371-374) In these three realms there are five 
courses: they are undefiled-neutral, comprise living beings, and 
exclude the intermediate state. 

5.(E393; T374-377) Beings of the five sorts occupy seven states of 
consciousness: (1) where bodies and ideas are different; (2) where 
bodies differ but ideas are similar; (3) where ideas are different but 
they have similar bodies; (4) where both body and ideas are similar; 
(5) - (7) constituting the three immaterial kinds of beings. 

6.(E396; T377) The remaining sorts of beings reduce consciousness. 

7b-8.(E398-401; T378-380) Another classification of states of 
consciousness counts the four contaminating aggregates of the 
relevant spheres; (the fifth,) consciousness itself is not a state of 
consciousness. 

9.(E402-403; T381) Human beings and animals are either born 
from an egg, born of moisture, born from the womb or are magical 
beings. Beings in hell or in the intermediate state, as well as gods, are 


ABHIDHARMAKOSA 497 


magical beings. Ghosts are either magical or womb-born. 

10-12.(405-411; T384-387) The intermediate state is required, 
since a being cannot generate itself again if it were to cease. It can't be 
generated as a reflection (a mirror-image), since two things can't 
occupy the same place. Anyway, a reflection is not (part of) the stream, 
(that being) caused by something else (viz., the mirror). 

Sutras authoritative about the intermediate state are cited. 

13-14.(E4129-424; T391-394) In the intermediate state one has the 
form he will have in his next birth. This form is seen by those 
occupying the same class and by those with the divine eye. One in the 
intermediate state has extraordinary strength and eats odors. 

15.(E426-429; T394-397) The intermediate being, its mind 
perverted, goes to its place of rebirth because of sexual desire. Others 
go motivated by a place's smell or a desire for a place of residence, 
whereas hell-beings hang from their feet. 

16-17.(E430; T397) Not all those in the womb are of perverted 
mind, but all those born from eggs are. Cakravartins enter the womb 
fully conscious, but do not remain or leave so. Self-enlightened 
buddhas remain fully conscious in the womb but do not leave it thus. 
A Buddha is always fully conscious. 

18.(E432-433; T399) There is no self, only the aggregates. It is the 
aggregates which reincarnate in another existence, through the 
medium of an intermediary existence. 

20-24.(E435-439; T401-404) Concerning the dependent 
origination formula: ignorance > conditioning factors > consciousness 
> psychophysical complex > six sense-fields > contact > feelings and 
identifications > craving > grasping > being > birth > aging and 
death. It can be interpreted in several ways: one can take ignorance 
and conditioning factors as referring to the anterior life, the next eight 
to the present life, and the rest to the life to come. On this 
interpretation "consciousness" is the consciousness at conception in the 
womb, and may stand for all the aggregates at conception. Contact 
first arises when the child is able to distinguish causes of frustration 
and satisfaction; "feelings" here refers to the feelings after sexual 
maturity, which are followed by cravings and graspings. "Being" refers 
to the conditions for the new rebirth. 

25.(E440-441; T405) The reason for the teaching of dependent 
origination as relating to three lives is to remove misunderstandings. 

27.(E443; T407) From a defilement another defilement may arise. 


498 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


28b-29.(E463-464; T419-420) Ignorance is itself a distinct factor, 
the contrary of knowledge, as amitra (a "nonfriend") is an enemy (not 
Just anyone other than one's friend). Itis a separate fetter. Ignorance 
is not evil wisdom, for evil wisdom is a view, views are associated with 
ignorance, and ignorance is an affliction of wisdom (not of ignorance 
itself). 

30-31.(E467-473; T422-426) Types of contact, which are produced 
by contiguity, are six in number. Five involve impingement. The sixth 
contact is of three sorts, (a) pure, involving knowledge, (b) defiled, 
involving ignorance, and (c) neither. 

32ab.(E473; T426) Six feelings are caused by contact, five bodily 
and one mental. 

32cd-35.(E479-485; 1431-435) There are eighteen kinds of 
feelings, corresponding to the eighteen mental ponderings. All 
eighteen operate in the realm of desire, twelve in the material realm, 
and three in the immaterial realm. 

37d-38c.(E491; T438-439) Among the four states of existence 
rearising is always defiled by the defilements of its stage of being. The 
other three can be good, bad or neutral. 

38d-41.(E492-496; T439-444) On what is and what is not "food" in 
the three realms. 

42-44.(E501-506; T447-451) Death and birth happen to mental 
awareness and involve equanimity. They don't occur during 
meditation, nor do they occur to one without awareness. The mind 
dies in that part of the body towards which it will proceed (the feet for 
hell, etc.). 

45-93.(ES06-544; T451-479) Cosmology. Description of our world, 
of hells, of the sun and moon, of heavens. The sizes and length of life 
of the inhabitants of these regions. 

94-99.(E544-557; T481-489) Buddhas appear on earth when the 
age of men approximates 100 years a lifetime. Self-enlightened 
Buddhas appear at two different times. Cakravartin kings have a 
lifetime of 80,000 years or more. An eon terminates through war, 
sickness and hunger. 


CHAPTER FOUR: Karma 


1.(E567-568; T551-552) Vasubandhu reduces all karma to volition 
and the bodily and vocal actions produced by volition. 


ABHIDHARMAKOSA 499 


2.(E568-569; T552) Bodily and vocal karma can be manifest or 
unmanifest. Manifest bodily karma determines configuration. There 
is no (acting in the sense of) movement, since all conditioned things 
are momentary, disappearing. 

3.(E570-578; T552-560) Still, nothing disappears without a cause, 
so the cause of anything is also a destroyer. 

Configuration is perceived by two. An atom has no configuration. 

Vocal bodily action (on the other hand) is speech. 

4ab.(ES79; T560) Siitras say that there are three kinds of material 
form, one of which is pure; that there is increase (of dharma); that one 
acts by giving order to others to act, etc. 

4cd.(E590; T568) Unmanifest karma in the realm of desire is 
derived from past elements. 

5-9.(E590-600; T569-575) Impure bodily and vocal actions in each 
realm arise with the great elements constituting their "agents" in that 
realm. Pure actions arise in the great elements of the "person" who 
produced them. Unmanifes: actions are not appropriated; they bear 
fruit naturally in living be .ags alone. That fruit is never neutral, and 
occurs in the realms of desire and matter. 

Manifest actions only occur in the first two realms (of desire and 
matter), but in the material realm the only such actions are 
movements of the great elements--the blowing of the wind, etc. Others 
say there are manifest actions in all four :ealms. 

10-12.(E600-604; T576-579) Vaibhasika: That which originates 
something (samutthana) is of two kinds; the inciting causal factor 
(pravartaka) called hetusamutthana and the accompanying causal 
factor which originates in the same moment, called 
tatksanasamutthdna. 

The kind of consciousness which is given up by seeing the four 
truths is an inciter only. The mental consciousness given up by 
meditation is both an inciter and an accompanying causal factor. The 
five sensory consciousnesses are inciting causal factors only. 

That which arises from retribution arises spontaneously without any 
conditioning factors being necessary. Thus retribution is neither a 
primary nor an accompanying causal factor. 

13-15.(E605-608; T580-583) There are three kinds of unmanifest 
karma: that involved in discipline, that not involved in discipline, and 
that which is neither. Disciplined action may be according to monastic 
discipline (pratimoksa), that involving meditation, and that which is 


500 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


noncontaminating. Those practising monastic discipline may be of 
eight or (alternatively) four types, depending on whether men are 
classified with or separately from women. The four are: laymen, 
abstainers, monks and bhiksus. 

16.(E609-610; T309-310) Monastic discipline consists of following 
moral precepts, active good conduct, action, and restraint. According 
to the Sautrantikas, but not according to the Vaibhasikas, it does not 
constitute a separate kind of entity. 

17-31.(E610-627; T584-600) Which are those aspirants who 
possess which sort of manifest and unmanifest karma and for how long 
is explained. 

32.(E628-630; T601) Someone who takes refuge in the Buddha, the 
dharma and the order is actually taking refuge in the special events 
which make for a Buddha, the events making up the action of the 
order, and nirvana. 

33.(E631; T603-604) Whereas the monk or nun takes on chastity, 
itis enough for laymen and laywomen if they renounce illicit love (see 
IV, 67). 

34.(E632-635; T605) Among the bad vocal actions (see IV, 67) itis 
false speech which is the worst. Avoiding proclivities is enjoined upon 
the layman so that the other rules can be kept. 

35-39.(E638-647; T607-614) More on moral matters. 

40-44.(E646-651; T616-620) How one leaves a realm by either 
progressing or backsliding. 

45-48.(E652-655; T621-624) Differentiation of good, bad and 
neutral actions and their three corresponding kinds of retributions. 

In the realm of desire clean karma is merit. In the higher realms 
unchangeable action is good because its retribution can only take place 
in the realm in which the deed was done. 

Clean karma breeds satisfaction in the first three meditative trances. 
In the fourth it breeds results that are neither satisfying nor frustrating. 
Bad karma breeds foul, frustrating feelings in the realm of desire. 

Some say that neutral karma (that is neither satisfying nor 
frustrating) occurs below the fourth meditative state, because there is 
no maturation in the intermediate state (between the first two stages) 
and because karmic maturation of all three sorts (good, bad, neutral) 
can occur at the same time. 

49-50.(E656-657; T624-625) There are five things that are called 
"feelings": feelings themselves, connections with things, supporting 


ABHIDHARMAKOSA 501 


objects, maturations and experiencings of feelings. These feelings are 
determined or not determined. Determined feeling is that experienced 
in this very life. 

51-52. (E658-660; T626-628) Some others say there are four (kinds 
of karma). 

A noble person does not produce any karma experienceable in a 
later existence. 

53.(E660-661; T628-629) One in the intermediate state in the 
realm of desire performs twenty-two kinds of actions that mature in 
the same existence. 

54-55.(E661-662; T629-630) Determined feeling results from 
action involving intense defilements or intense serenity that has to do 
with certain fields, or from the murder of a father or mother. 

56.(E663; T631) The effects of acts are immediately experienced by 
five sorts: one who has just left cessation-trance, one who has just left 
the nonpassionate trance, one who has just left the trance of loving 
kindness, one who has just left the path of vision, one who has become 
a noble person. 

57-58.(E664-667; T632-634) Feelings that result from good actions 
free of initial thought are only mental. Feelings resulting from bad 
actions are only physical. Mental disorders--fear, hallucinations, 
irritation--are karmic results afflicting those in the realm of desire. 

59-60.(E668-669; T635) About bad (black), good (white) and 
mixed (black-white) karma. 

61-63.(E670-672; T636-637) The kinds of acts that destroy bad 
karma are twelve--four patiences and the first eight paths of 
nonattachment in the realm of desire. The thoughts of the ninth path 
are those that destroy mixed (black-white) karma. The thoughts that 
occur while practising meditative nonattachment destroy the good 
karma. 

Others say that retributions of both bad and neutral karma occur in 
hell as well as in the realm of desire. Still others say that bad karma is 
that which can be abandoned by vision, whereas neutral karma can be 
abandoned by meditation. 

64-65.(E672-674; T638-639) The adept's bodily, vocal and mental 
acts are the three sagely (mauna) things. 

There are three bad practices that are not actions, and good practice 
is the opposite of these. 

67.(E676; T641) Six courses of bad action can be unmanifest acts. 


502 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


One bad act is always of two kinds, and the rest are of two kinds when 
one does them himself. Seven kinds of good actions are of two kinds; 
they are unmanifest only when occurring during meditation. 

69.(E682; T646-647) Good actions, enumerated as the 
abandonments of the bad ones, arise from nondesire, nonhatred and 
lack of false views. 

72.(E684; T648-649) Even someone who has been forced into the 
army should never kill. 

73.(E685-687; T649-651) The "taking of life" enumerated refers to 
wilful killing, not accidental killing. 

74.(E687-688; T651-652) Offenses of lust comprise intercourse 
with four kinds of women one should not consort with. False speech-- 
lying--is addressing one who understands a meaning of the words used 
but where the speaker uses the words with a different intent. 

75-78.(E689-695; T653-658) The rest of the six principal bad 
actions are discussed. 

79-80.(E697-702; T659-663) The good roots are severed, among 
humans completely or gradually, by the view that they don't exist, the 
denial of causal relations. Both men and women may sever good roots 
or bad roots. 

82-84.(E708-710; T666-668) Which courses of action are available 
in the different realms. 

85.(E711-712; T669-670) Each course of action has retributional, 
outflowing, and dominant result. The retribution of murder is 
suffering, of outflows a short life; the dominant result is loss of energy. 

86-94.(E713-720; T671-677) Details concerning the kinds and 
numbers of factors resulting from good, bad and neutral acts. 

95.(E721-722; T677-678) But the retributional effect of an act can 
occur only in the same life, or in the next life: it cannot extend for two 
lives after the act. Even though they have a retribution, the highest 
meditational attainments don't project an action, because they don't 
coexist with conscious action. There are three kinds of obstructions: 
obstructions due to past actions, obstructions which are defilements, 
obstructions which are retributional. 

96.(E722-724; T679-680) The obstructions due to actions are those 
coming primarily from the five grave offences: killing one's mother, 
killing one's father, killing a noble person, causing division in the 
order, and harming a Buddha. It is a graver offence to kill one's 
mother than it is to kill one's father. 





ABHIDHARMAKOSA 503 


98-102.(E725-729; T681-685) Causing divisions in the order is 
lying. One who causes such division falls to the avici hell for an entire 
eon. More about such schisms. 

103.(E730-732; T685-686) The same kind of gravity does not occur 
if a person kills his mother thinking it's someone else, or if he kills her 
accidentally. 

106-107.(E734-735; T689-690) Other grave offences include 
defiling one's mother or a noble person, killing a Bodhisattva or an 
adept, stealing from the order, or destroying a stiipa. 

108-112b.(E735-739; T690-694) The retributional effects of acts 
can be severed by the acquisition of perfect patience or forbearance, or 
by becoming a nonreturner (one who is never reborn among human 
beings, but may be reborn among gods), or by becoming a noble 
person. 

One is a Bodhisattva when he performs actions that produce (some 
of) the (thirty-two) marks. Only males in Jambudvipa have such 
marks, which arise from one hundred merits. The virtues of a 
Bodhisattva are described. 

112c-127.(E739-755; T694-708) Giving, morality and meditation 
are meritorious acts separately and in combination. Whom to give to 
and what to give are indicated. Giving produces satisfying experience, 
morality produces heaven, meditation produces liberation. 


CHAPTER FIVE: Proclivities 


1-2a.(E759-761; T767-768) Proclivities are the roots of existence. 
There are six: attachment, repugnance, pride, ignorance, views, and 
perplexity. Dividing attachment into attachment to sensual pleasure 
and attachment to existence there are seven. 

2b-d.(E764-765; T771) There are two kinds of attachment to 
existence: attachment to existence in the material realm and 
attachment to existence in the immaterial realm (see I, 30). 

3.(E765; T772) There are five kinds of false views: belief in a self, 
extreme beliefs, adherence to particular views, adherence to mere rule 
and ritual, and other false views. 

4.(E765; T773) The four noble truths counteract these traces. 

S.(E766-768; T773-774) Four proclivities are abandoned through 
meditation in the realm of desire, and (excepting repugnance) in the 


504 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


other three realms, so that there are ninety-eight proclivities in all. 

8.(E773; T779) Insistence on God as cause of the world, etc., which 
arises from mistaken views about permanence and self, is abandoned 
through vision. 

9.(E778-779; T781-782) There are four mistaken views falling into 
three of the five kinds of view. Identifications and awarenesses also 
can be erroneous. 

10-11.(E782-785; T784-788) There are seven kinds of pride that 
are destroyed by vision and meditation. The enveloper of killing, etc. 
is destroyed by meditation, as well as the desire to leave off existing. 
Pride and foul regret, involving views, are never found in noble 
persons. 

12-19.(E785-794; T788-798) On the pervasive proclivities, how 
they function, in which realm. 

20-24.(E795-803; T798-805) Attachment, resistance and delusion 
are the bad roots. Three--craving, ignorance and intellection--are 
neutral roots. The other proclivities are not roots at all. The outsiders 
(bahyaka) say four--craving, views, pride and delusion--are neutral. 

Which are the questions that can be answered outright, which by 
making distinctions, which in relation to what, which involving 
complexity? 

25-26.(E804-808; T806-810)°* Vaibhasika: Future and past factors 
exist as well as present ones, because the Buddha taught it, because of 
two, because an object exists, because of result. 

There are four kinds of Sarvastivadins, depending on whether they 
teach difference in being, in definition, in state or mutually. The third 
view is best. 

Temporal distinctions are established by their functioning. 

28-31.(E819-823; T820-833) Is one who realizes the first truth (of 
frustration) released from previous frustrations altogether? No, since 
he is bound to them by the pervasive proclivities, and remains so 
through the fourth, immaterial stage. 

32-33.(E828-829; T825-828) Doubt arises from delusion. It results 
in false views, and from false views arises the view of a fixed self in the 
body. From the view of a fixed self in the body arises adherence to 
mere rule and ritual; from this in turn arises adherence to particular 
views; from this arises attachment and pride; from that, aversion. 

34.(E829-830; T828) The defilements arise when their proclivities 
have not been eradicated, or when an object liable to make them arise 


ene 


be. 


ABHIDHARMAKOSA 505 


occurs, or from careless mental attention. 

36.(E831; T830-831) Ignorance is the root. 

37-40.(E832-835; T831-834) Likewise the floods and bonds, which 
include views, are proclivities, as well as the graspings, which include 
ignorance. These various classifications are interrelated. 

42.(E838; T837) Envy and selfishness are particularly named 
because they arise from ignorance itself. 

47-48a.(E844; T842) The envelopers are shamelessness, disregard, 
envy, selfishness, excitedness, regret, lethargy and sleepiness; anger 
and hypocrisy also. 

48b-49.(E485; T843) From attachment arise shamelessness, 
excitedness and selfishness. From ignorance arise lethargy, sleepiness 
and disregard. From perplexity regret arises. From repugnance arise 
envy and anger. 

50b-51a.(E486; T844) From attachment arise arrogance and deceit. 
From repugnance arise vengefulness and violence. From adherence to 
views arises spite. From views arises craftiness. 

51b-52.(E847; T846-847) Shamelessness, disregard, lethargy, 
sleepiness and excitedness can be eradicated by seeing the truths and 
by meditation; the others can only be eradicated by meditation. 

56.(E849-850; T849) Perplexity is associated with irritation. The 
others which are views, with the exception of false views and pride, are 
associated usually with satisfaction. All of them may be associated with 
indifference. 

57.(E850; T849-850) Regret, envy, hypocrisy, violence, 
vengefulness and spite are always associated with frustration. 

58.(E850-851; T850) Craftiness, deceit, hypocrisy and sleepiness 
may be associated with either satisfaction or frustration. 
Shamelessness, disregard, lethargy and excitedness can be associated 
with frustration, contentedness, satisfaction or irritation. 

59-62.(E851-858; T851-857) Lethargy and sleepiness, and 
excitedness and regret, are two pairs that as pairs count as 
obstructions, since they oppose the same things. 

Defilements are destroyed by comprehension, by destroying 
homogeneous defilements, by abandoning their objects. 

63.(E860; T858-859) Destruction of homogeneous defilements 
takes place variously: by the arising of an antidote, by acquisition of 
results, or by perfection of the faculties. 

64-70. (E861-870; T862-869) Discussion of the nine ascertainments 


506 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
and six results of patience, and how they are attained. 
CHAPTER SIX: The Saints and the Path 


1.(E871; T895) The path consists of two divisions: the path of 
vision, where false views are abandoned, and the path of meditation. 

2.(E872; T896) On the four truths. 

3.(E875; T899) Contaminating factors involve one or another of 
three kinds of frustration. 

4.(E8898; T910) Awareness of a jar ends when the jar is broken; 
awareness of water ends when one analyzes it. Jug and water exist 
(only) conventionally. What is (highest) truth is different. 

6.(E892; T913-914) Meditation succeeds when the practitioner is 
withdrawn from society and when his awarenesses are removed from 
bad mental applications. 

7.(E893; T914-915) Insatiability has an antidote in contentment 
and in wishing for little. These are forms of absence of greed. 

8cd.(E894; T916) Both the desire for an object and the ideas of 
"mine" and "I" are removed, either momentarily or definitively, in 
meditation. 

9-11a.(E894-897; T916-919) Description of the meditational 
process by which one reduces one's body to its elements: skeletal 
system, etc. 

12.(E898-899; T921-922) Description of the Buddhist breathing 
meditation. 

13.(E901-902; T923-925) On breathing. 

14-18.(E902-909; T925-932) Discussion of the four establishments 
of mindfulness focussed on the flow of the material elements of the 
body, on feelings, on awarenesses, and on factors, meaning here 
primarily conditioning factors. 

19.(E911-912; T932-933) Relation of the meditational stages of the 
aids to penetration with the establishment of mindfulness. 

20-24.(E914-921; T935-942) The four aids to penetration. 

25-26.(E921-924; T942-946) Immediately after the aids to 
penetration the first moment of the path of vision occurs. It is called 
"the patience (necessary) for the knowledge of factors in frustration", 
whose content is frustration in the realm of desires. Immediately after 
it arises knowledge of factors which is frustration itself. Immediately 
after that occurs the subsequent patience (necessary) for the 





ABHIDHARMAKOSA 507 


knowledge of factors in frustration. This, and the subsequent 
knowledges of factors in frustration relate to frustration of the material 
and immaterial realms. The same sequence of four patiences and 
knowledges occurs subsequently for the other noble truths. 

27.(E925-928; T946-949) Thus in total there are sixteen awareness- 
moments on the path of vision. 

29-32. (E933-936; T952-955) In the path of vision those who have 
mild faculties are faith-followers, those with keen faculties are factor- 
followers. Unless they have already conquered (the proclivities) by 
meditation they become candidates for stream-enterer-ship. Then, 
when they attain the ninth awareness-moment of the path of vision, 
they become candidates for the once-returner state, and thence 
candidates for the third state (of nonreturner) by abandoning that 
awareness. In the sixteenth moment they achieve the state for which 
they were candidates and become resolved in faith or in vision. 

33-39.(E938-955; T956-971) Each of the four stages has nine 
levels, depending on whether it is weaker or stronger. Terms for those 
at certain points along the way: A stream-enterer-candidate who has 
not started to eliminate the proclivities conquered by meditation is 
"one who has seven more lives to live". When three or four levels of the 
first stage (the stage of desire) have been eliminated he is termed 
"going from family to family" (kulamkula). When five levels are 
eliminated he becomes a candidate for once-returner-ship 
(sakrdagamin), and attains it on eliminating the sixth level. A "single- 
seeker" (ekavicika) is one who has eliminated the seventh or eighth 
level. 

There are seven kinds of nonreturners: (1) one who achieves 
liberation in the intermediate state, (2) one who achieves it as soon as 
he is reborn, (3) one who gains liberation through effort, (4) one who 
gets liberation without effort, (5) one who goes higher to the akanistha 
heaven or to the summit of existence, (6) one who goes to the 
immaterial state, and (7) one who is liberated in the present life. Nine 
kinds of nonreturners go to the material realm. 

44.(E956-970; T980-981) The nonreturner is a candidate for 
perfected being until he destroys the eighth part of the summit of 
existence. The ninth part is diamond-like, involving knowledge of 
liberation. 

45-49.(E971-977; T983-990) There are two kinds of spiritual path: 
mundane and supramundane. The learner detaches himself by the 


508 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


supramundane path from the world (at the summit of existence), from 
the other realms by either path. 

50-57.(E978-990; T991-1003) Then, immovable, he is aware that 
he will not arise again, while retaining the insight of an adept. Then he 
is a true monk. Various classes of perfected beings are distinguished. 

58.(E992; T1003) Who can regress from their genus and who from 
their realm. 

63-64.(E1007-1011; T1016-1019) Noble persons can be of one of 
seven kinds, depending on their application, their faculties, their 
meditative attainment, their liberation, their being of two kinds. The 
adept achieving cessation is one liberated in both of the two ways; 
others are liberated through wisdom. A disciple is incomplete in 
meditative attainment, in faculties and in result. 

67-79.(E1016-1032; T1023-1039) On the limbs of enlightenment. 


CHAPTER SEVEN: The Knowledges 


(This Chapter relates primarily to the knowledges gained on the 
path of vision.) 

1.(E1033-1035; T1087-1088) The patiences experienced on the 
path of vision are not knowledge. 

2-4.(E1035-1036; T1088-1090) Awarenesses are contaminating or 
noncontaminating. Contaminating awareness is conventional. 
Noncontaminating awarenesses are either awarenesses of factors like 
frustrations, etc. or inferential awarenesses concerning them; together 
they constitute knowledge of destruction and of nonorigination. 

5-6ab. (E1036-1038; T1090-1092) One can know others’ 
awarenesses, though not those in a higher realm, nor the past and 
future, nor others' awareness of factors and inferences. 

13.(E1057-1062; T1110-1117) There are sixteen aspects, and they 
constitute wisdom. 

14.(E1062-1063; T1117-1118) Conventional knowledge may be 
either good, bad, or neutral. All the knowledges on the path of vision 
are good only. 

15.(E1063-1064; T1119) Knowledge of others’ awarenesses occurs 
only in the four meditational stages. 

16.(E1064-1065; T1119-1120) It also involves necessarily 
knowledge of others' feelings, cognitions, and motivating dispositions. 

33.(E1093-1095: T1 143-1144) The great compassion of a Buddha 


ABHIDHARMAKOSA 509 


differs from other compassion. 

34.(E1096-1099; T1145) All Buddhas are equal as far as their body 
of essential teaching is concerned, and as far as their service to others, 
but they differ on less essential things: caste, duration of their lives, 
etc. 

36-41.(E1100-1106; T1149-1156) Nonpassion is a conventional 
awareness of the fourth meditative sphere, produced by immovable 
(noble) humans, and helps block future defilements of others. So also 
are knowledge from vows and of factors and the discriminations of 
factors, objects, etymologies and perspicuities. 

42-47.(E1106-1115; T1157-1167) The six higher faculties of a 
Buddha are supernatural powers: divine ear, knowing other intentions 
and thoughts, memory of past lives, divine visual power, and the 
knowledge of the destruction of frustrations. They provide awareness 
of the path to liberation. Four are conventional awarenesses, five exist 
in one of the four trance states. They relate to their own or a lower 
sphere. The first three constitute the first establishment of 
mindfulness. All are good except the divine eye and ear which are 
neutral. Only the knowledge of the destruction of proclivities is found 
in the adept; knowledge of others’ intentions and of past lives are said 
to belong there but in that relation do not constitute wisdom. 

48-53.(E1115-1121; 11168-1176) Supernatural power is 
concentration, and enables one's mind to move rapidly and create 
magical beings. Magical beings can speak by their creator's speaking 
at another time and locating the speech in the magical body. He can 
even locate the speech after his death (though this is not accepted by 
some). Supernatural powers can also be exercised through mantras, 
through medicinal plants, or through karma. 


CHAPTER EIGHT: The Meditational Concentration 


2.(E1129-1130; T1216-1220) The first meditational stage is 
accompanied by sustained thought, joy and satisfaction; these are 
successively abandoned in the other three states. 

The immaterial meditational attainments are made up of the four 
aggregates excluding matter. 

3.(E1137; T1225) There is no matter in the immaterial attainments. 
Matter arises from (karmically conditioned) awareness. 

13.(E1150-1151; T1241) The consciousnesses in the higher stages 


510 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of meditational concentration are all unobstructed and neutral. 

14-23.(E1151-1163; T1243-1256) How and when the attainments 
are accomplished. 

29-38.(E1170-1185; T1264-1280) The four boundless states and 
the eight liberations culminating in cessation trance. 

39.(E1176; T1281) The dharma of the Buddha has two aspects: 
agama (the teaching itself) and adhigama (the allies of enlightenment, 
cf. VI, 66) and their results. 


CHAPTER NINE: Refutation of the Self 


(This Chapter, being in prose only, unlike the rest of the 
Abhidharmako§a which is in verse, seems to have been originally an 
independent treatise. It has as its aim the refutation of the self as found 
in Vaisesika, etc., as well as of the "person" as found in the 
Vatsiputriyas.)°* 

(E1189-1193; T1313-1315) How can we know that "self" is only a 
designation for a series of factors? There is no evidence of any sort for 
a "self" apart from the elements of constituting personality. The 
Vatsiputriya admits a person (pudgala) which is neither totally 
identical with the aggregates nor totally different from them. Does this 
person exist as an entity (dravyatas) or only as a designation 
(prajftaptitas)? If the person is an entity, it has to be different from 
other aggregates, it has to be either produced by causes, which means 
it can't be lasting as the Vatsiputriya claims, or be unconditioned, in 
which case it has no efficacy. Thus the person can't be an entity. But 
if it is only a designation, then we have no argument. 

Vatsiputriya: The person is neither an entity nor just a designation. 
It occurs in relation to the aggregates. 

Vasubandhu: What do you mean? If you mean that the term 
"pudgala" arises only with the aggregates, then we have no argument. 

(E1193-1195; T1315-1317) Vatsiputriya: It is rather like the case 
of fire and the combustible material. Fire cannot exist apart from the 
material, and yet the two are not identical. 

Vasubandhu: But what exactly is it that is being designated as "fire", 
as "combustible material"? 

Vatsiputriya: It is the series of the "combustible material" which is 
turned into ashes by the series "fire". 

Vasubandhu: But the material must exist previously to the fire in 


ABHIDHARMAKOSA 511 


order for the fire to arise. For your analogy to be exact, the person 
must thus arise after the aggregates, and be transitory as well. 

Vatsiputriya: No, because fire exists inherently in the combustible 
material. But since their characteristics are different--"fire" being that 
elementin the combustible material which allows for its combustion-- 
“fire"and "combustible material" are entities apart. 

Vasubandhu: One can't claim that fire is the cause of the material, 
and any other clear relationship between them is also not established. 

Vatsiputriya: But there is a coexistence of fire and the material; thus 
fire has that material as its support. 

Vasubandhu: This means that fire is different from the material, but 
that it doesn't exist unless the combustible material does. For your 
analogy to be exact, the person must be different from the aggregates, 
and yet exist only with the aggregates. 

Vatsiputiiya: But in our analogy fire is not completely different from 
the material, since the material is also hot. 

Vasubandhu: What is the nature of heat? If one defines the hot as 
being the element heat, i.e., fire, then the material is not itself fire. If 
one extends the adjective "hot" to include the material, then two 
different kinds of things are being defined by the same adjective. 

Vatsiputriya: Wood being burned is called both combustible 
material and fire. 

Vasubandhu: What then is the sense of your statement that fire 
exists in relation to the material? From what you just said "fire" and 
"combustible material" are the same, and no relation can exist between 
them. Thus your analogy does not demonstrate a relationship between 
the person and the aggregates. 

(E1195-1201; T1318-1322) Vatsiputriya: The person is neither 
exactly the same as the aggregates nor completely different from them. 

Vasubandhu: If the expression "pudgala (person)" is used only 
where the aggregates occur, it is nothing but the aggregates. If it is 
used in relation to an independent person, then why say it arises in 
relation to the aggregates? 

Vatsiputriya: When the aggregates exist, the person is perceived. 

Vasubandhu: By which consciousness is it perceived? 

Vatsiputriya: By all six. 

Vasubandhu: It is impossible to establish the existence of a 
perception of a person by the visual consciousness or any other 
consciousness. 


512 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(E1201-1204; T1322-1327) Canonical support for the nonexistence 
of the person. 

(E1205-1206; T1327-1328) Vatsiputriya: But there is also a siitra 
which says "In the past, I had this form." 

Vasubandhu: But the Buddha doesn't intend to say that there is a 
person which in the past had another form. This "I" is merely a 
metaphor for a psychophysical series. Similarly, one says "a current of 
water", even though this "current" really consists of a series of 
momentary events. 

Vatsiputriya: Then the Buddha is not omniscient. For one can't 
know all the aggregate-moments of all times. But one can know a 
person. 

Vasubandhu: I don't believe the Buddha is omniscient in the way 
the Mahasanghikas do. By the word "Buddha" I mean a certain 
psychophysical series which is associated with a particular power 
which allows any awareness arising in the series to completely know 
any particular object--this power in the series is called "omniscience". 

(E1206-1207; T1328-1330) Vatsiputriya: But there is astitra where 
the Buddha says "I will explain to you the burden, the taking of the 
burden, the depositing of the burden and the taker of the burden." 

Vasubandhu: This siitra does not establish the existence of a 
separate "taker". What it indicates is different phases in the 
psychophysical complex, as it itself explains. 

(E1207-1214; T1330-1337) Examination of different siitra passages 
where "person" is used metaphorically with the intention of reducing 
a questioner's confusion. Discussion of stitras where the Buddha 
refuses to answer questions because whichever way he would answer 
would increase the questioner's confusion. 

(E1214-1215; T1337-1338) Vatsiputriya: If the person doesn't exist 
how can there be transmigration? 

Vasubandhu: The term "transmigration" is a metaphor. Just as one 
says "the fire is spreading", new flames in reality arising at each 
moment, in the same way momentary events are arising which are 
related to each other as cause and effect, this series having different 
loci. 

(E1215-1218; T1339-1342)*” Vatsiputriya: If there is no person, 
and only momentary events, how can there be memory of a long past 
event? 

Vasubandhu: For memory to occur there must be a special 


ABHIDHARMAKOSA 513 


awareness directed at the object of memory which is connected with 
cognitions relating to the object or to objects similar to it, or to a 
resolution to remember. 

Vatsiputriya: But how can one awareness have perceived the object 
and another totally different awareness remember it later? Yajiiadatta 
can't remember the object seen by Devadatta! 

Vasubandhu: There is no connection between Yajfiadatta and 
Devadatta--their awarenesses are not in a relation of cause and effect. 
However, the awareness which perceived an object and the awareness 
which later remembers it are related as cause and effect. The 
awareness which perceived is the cause of the awareness which 
remembers in the same way as a seed is the cause of a future fruit, 
through a transformation of the intermediary events of the series. 

(E1219-1220; T1342-1344) It is said that Devadatta cognizes 
because the psychophysical complex which is termed "Devadatta" is 
the cause of a consciousness’ arising. What is consciousness doing? 
Nothing. It arises coordinately (sadrgya) with its object. Actually it 
does nothing in relation to the object, but it is said to perceive the 
object because it arises coordinately with it. This coordination consists 
of the fact that the consciousness has the aspect (akara) of the object. 
This is why the consciousness is said to perceive the object, even 
though the object is only one of its causes; the other causes, such as the 
sense-organ, are not related to the consciousness in the same sense 
that it takes its aspect. A factor gives rise to a succeeding factor which 
may have the same object--thus it is said to be an agent, because it is 
a cause. It is metaphorically said to perceive just as one says that an 
oil-lamp, or its flame, moves--in reality there are only successions of 
flame-moments. In the same way, "consciousness" is used as a term for 
a series of momentary awarenesses. When an awareness-moment 
occurs relatively to a new object it is said, metaphorically, that 
consciousness is perceiving its object. 

(£1220-1222; T1344-1346) Samkhya: If a succeeding 
consciousness arises from an anterior one, and not froma self, why is 
the succeeding consciousness not always similar to the previous one, 
and why don't the consciousnesses arise according to a fixed 
succession? 

Vasubandhu: Everything is constantly transforming (see II, 45). And 
there is a certain order as to which awarenesses arise from which. 

(E1222-1226; T1346-1348) The Vaigesika claims that awarenesses 


514 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


arise from a self. But we can use the same arguments just used against 
us: Why is a succeeding awareness not the same as a previous one? 
Why don't awarenesses arise according to a fixed succession? 

Vaigesika: Because there is a great diversity in the contacts of the 
self and the internal organ. 

Vasubandhu: Contact itself cannot be established. Your own 
definition of "contact" implies that two entities in contact are delimited 
and localized. Thus, following your theory, the self cannot be 
omnipresent as you claim. Following your theory, also, when the 
internal organ is directed towards a part of the body the self must also 
be so directed, and thus either it isn't devoid of action, as you claim it 
is, or it is not eternal, which you claim it to be. You can't claim that 
only a part of the self is conjoined with the internal organ, for 
according to you the self has no parts. And if there were an immutable 
contact between the self and the internal organ, how could one explain 
the diversity of awarenesses? This diversity is also inexplicable if the 
self is not diverse. If you say that this diversity results from the 
diversity of the contacts of the selves and internal organs, which 
diversity results from the diversity of traces, then why not say that the 
diversity of awarenesses results from the diversity of traces? The self 
is not necessary in that case. If you say that the self is the support of the 
traces and the internal organ, this cannot be literally true, since there 
can be no physical contact with an immaterial self. If you say that the 
self supports the traces in the same way that the earth supports smells, 
then you have come over to our position, for we claim that "earth" is 
nothing more than a designation for a collection of smells, etc. 

Vaisesika: If earth is nothing but smells, etc. how can one speak of 
"the earth's smell"? 

Vasubandhu: In the same way that one can say "the statue's body". 
If the self produces awarenesses because of the variety of the traces, 
why doesn't it produce all awarenesses at the same time? 

(E1226; T1348-1349) Vaisesika: Because the strongest trace 
prohibits the weaker ones from producing their effects. The traces are 
not permanent and are subject to transformation. 

Vasubandhu: But what is the self doing here? The awarenesses 
seem to be arising from the traces alone. 

Vaisesika: Traces, etc., are qualities: a quality must have a substance 
as its substratum. And the substratum of traces must be the self. 

Vasubandhu: But the entire system of substances and qualities is not 


ABHIDHARMAKOSA 515 


proven. We think that everything that exists is a "substance" or entity. 

Vaisesika: If there is no self, how can there be retribution for acts? 

(E1226-1228; T1349-1352) Vasubandhu: The retribution of acts 
affects a psychophysical series. It is this series, or even just certain 
elements in it, which is considered a self, such as when it is said "I am 
black", etc. The self which you postulate has got nothing to do with 
blackness, and yet the word "I" is used in this case. In the same way, 
every instance of the use of the term "I" really refers to the 
psychophysical series, or certain elements within it. 

Vaisesika: When one says "I am black" this does not refer to the self 
but to the body which serves the self. 

Vasubandhu: But all expressions of "I" and "self" are metaphorical. 

Vaisesika: If the notion of "self" is only in reference to elements of 
a psychophysical complex, how does one distinguish self and others? 

Vasubandhu: Because there is no relation between those other 
psychophysical complexes and the notion. It is only the psychophysical 
complex which is in a causal relation to the notion which is designated 
by that term. 

Vaisesika: If there is no self, to what do you attribute the notion of 
an "I"? 

Vasubandhu: The psychophysical complex itself, the experiences of 
which are interrelated. 

Vaisesika: Who is the agent or enjoyer? 

Vasubandhu: What do these terms even mean? 

Vaisesika: The agent is one who has an independent power in 
relation to an action. The enjoyer is he who experiences the effects of 
an action. 

Vasubandhu: These definitions are untenable. What does one mean 
by "Devadatta"? If one means a self, it is still undemonstrated. If one 
means a complex of aggregates, then Devadatta is an agent, but not an 
independent one. A bodily action depends on an awareness acting on 
the body, and this body and awareness themselves depend upon other 
causes and conditions, and in all this there is no one entity which could 
be designated as an independent agent. According to you, the self 
does not depend on causes and conditions, and it doesn't do anything, 
thus it can't be an agent, either. What one designates as an agent of an 
act is according to us the principal cause, among many causes, of the 
act. 

(E1229-1232; T1352-1355) The series of causes and conditions for 


516 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


an action is as follows: A memory makes the desire to act arise, from 
this desire to act arises an initial thought, from this initial thought 
arises an effort, which gives rise to a motile element, which puts the 
body into "motion". Where is there any room for a self in this process? 

Vaisesika: Without a self, how can an action in the past, which has 
already ceased, bring about a future effect? 

Vasubandhu: The effect does not arise from the action, which has 
ceased. The effect arises as the last moment of the transformation of 
a series which originated with the act. It is the same as a fruit "arising 
from a seed"--in fact, it arises from the transformation of a series which 
has its origin in the seed. By a "series" we mean material and 
psychological elements which succeed each other without 
interruption. Each one of the momentary elements is different: thus it 
is said that the series is transforming. The last moment of an evolution 
has a special efficacy to produce a special effect. There is a difference 
to be noted between the force of retribution and the outcome (see I, 
37-38). When the force of retribution gives its effect, the force itself 
ceases, thus there is only one retribution for an act, but the force of 
flow, which is projected by homogeneous causes, continues to operate, 
and only ceases by virtue of a specific antidote. The force of 
retribution, on the other hand, is rather like the case where one dyes 
a lemon-flower red, and this gives rise to a transformation in the series 
flower-fruit which has the result that the center of the lemon arising 
from the flower will also be red. But the red seed in the center of this 
lemon, if it is itself planted, will not give rise to another lemon with a 
red center. In the same way, the retribution of an action does not give 
rise to another retribution. Only the Buddhas know exactly how the 
psychophysical series, impregnated by the volitions of past actions, 
transform to give a retributional effect. In no case is it necessary to 
assume a self or personality-entity. 


174. VASUBANDHU, Bhasya on his Abhidharmakosa 


Since it has been doubted by some scholars that the authors of the 
Kosa and this Bhdsya are the same, we have separated the summaries 
of the two works. "E" and "T" references are to the same texts as for the 
previous (#173) summary. 


Sate 


ean cts 


Sen 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 517 
Summary by Stefan Anacker 
CHAPTER ONE 


2.(E11-13; T56-57Z) The "accompaniments" of pure wisdom are the 
five pure aggregates. 

Sc.(E19; TS59) Space does not obstruct, and is not displaced by 
material form. 

6.(E20-2; TS9-60) Calculated cessations involve disjunctions from 
contaminating factors gained by wisdom concerning the four noble 
truths. These disjunctions are "separate", since one does not achieve 
complete cessation by only one disjunction. 

7.(E21-27; T61-62) Conditioned factors "ex-ist" since it is from and 
through them that one "ex-its" to nirvana. They involve actual objects 
in the sense of being causally conditioned. 

10.(E32-35; T64-66) The two material bases are color and shape. 
Color and shape may occur separately. 

Sautrantika: How can a single entity be both color and shape, if 
these are distinct things? 

Answer: Because they're found in a single thing. 

Sautrantika: Then you should admit a "manifest form" as an 
additional type of material form. 

The eleven tangibles are: the four great elements, smoothness, 
roughness, heaviness, lightness, cold, hunger and thirst. 

11.(E38-39; T68) Unmanifest form is termed "material" because it 
is derived from the great elements. 

13.(E44-47; T70-72) Vaibhasika: To be "material" is to be capable 
of being damaged. 

Vasubandhu: Some say, however, that the characteristic of 
materiality is that it exercises a resistance which makes it 
impenetrable. But in that case, a single atom itself is not material, as 
it exercises no resistance. 

Vaibhasika: But the single atom never exists in an isolated state, and 
in combination with other atoms does exercise resistance. 

Vasubandhu: Material entities of the past and future can't really be 
material, as they exercise no resistance. 

Vaibhasika: But they were exercising or will exercise it! 

Vasubandhu: Unmanifest form can't be matter. 

Vaibhasika: Yes it can. One moment of unmanifest form depends 


518 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


upon previous moments which are material, just as the shadow of a 
tree depends on the tree. 

Vasubandhu: But unmanifest form isn't subject to transformations, 
and does not cease when the manifest form does. Thus the simile of 
shadow and tree doesn't apply. 

Vaibhasika: But unmanifest form is material, because it depends 
upon the material elements of the body. 

Vasubandhu: In that case, the five visual consciousnesses are also 
material. 

Vaibhasika: No, because unmanifest form rests totally on the 
material elements, as a shadow does on a tree, whereas the 
consciousnesses do not rest utterly on their organs, which are only the 
causes of the arisings. 

Vasubandhu: But according to your own thesis each of the atoms 
which make up a shadow depends upon the four great elements. Thus 
they don't depend on the tree. 

Vaibhasika: A visual consciousness depends not only on the eye, 
which is material, but also on the mind, which isn't. 

14.(E48-49; T72-73) Experiencings are frustrating, satisfying, or 
neither. 

15.(E49-50; T72-74) Vaibhasika: Unmanifest material form and the 
three unconditioned factors are also included within the sense-basis of 
factors or the realm of factors. 

16.(ES0-51; T74) The six kinds of manifesting are visual, auditory, 
olfactory, gustatory, tactile and mental. The seven elements comprise 
the elements of visual, audial, olfactory, gustatory, tactual and mental 
consciousness plus the mental element. There is no "mind" distinct 
from these consciousnesses. 

20.(E60-63; T79-80) Vasubandhu: If the meaning of "skandha" as 
"aggregate", i.e., a group, is to be taken literally, then aggregates are 
only nominal entities, since groups are not actual entities. 

Vaibhasika: No, because the atom itself is an aggregate. 

Vasubandhu: Then don't say that the skandhas are aggregates! 

Vaibhasika: Every instance of matter, whether past, present or 
future, is called an "aggregate". 

Vasubandhu: But nonetheless they have only a nominal existence, 
if they are mere groups. The material sense-fields cannot give rise to 
sensory consciousnesses unless they are groups, since the individual 
atoms are not perceived. Thus the sense-fields have only nominal 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 519 


existence. The teaching of the aggregates has been devised to 
counteract the view of a self. 

21.(E64; T81) Disputes mainly concern desires involving feelings, 
and opinions involving identifications. 

23.(E67-68; T84) A mental consciousness may have an object which 
is simultaneous, past or future, or simultaneous and past and future, 
or beyond time. 

29.(E79-81; T89-92) There are three kinds of resistance: that of 
obstruction, that of the contact of a sense-organ with its content, and 
that of awareness accompanying mental factors with their contents. 
The difference between a "content" and a "supporting object" is that the 
content, or object of sense, is where the sensory organ carries out its 
function; the supporting object is what is grasped by awarenesses and 
mental factors. But why does one speak of a "resistance" inherent in 
contact with a sense-content? Because the organ cannot exercise its 
activity any farther than its sense-content. But when we speak of ten 
sensory domains exercising resistance, we are speaking of the 
resistance of obstruction only. Kumaralata states that though a 
consciousness having a color as its content and the eye for its support 
may be impeded from arising by the interposition of another material 
body between the eye and the color, the mental consciousness and the 
domain of mentally cognizables cannot be impeded in the same way. 
For instance, if a feeling (a kind of cognizable) arises, nothing can stop 
the mental consciousness from perceiving it. 

30.(E82-87; T92-95) Which of the material elements are good, 
which bad, which neutral? The five material organs plus smells, tastes, 
and touches are always karmically neutral. The seven mental elements 
of consciousness are good, bad or neutral according to the traces 
accompanying them. The factor element itself includes the traces and 
thus may be either good, bad or neutral. The elements of sight and 
sound are good or bad if they form part of a good or bad bodily or 
verbal action; in all other cases they too are neutral. 

Tastes and smells do not occur in the material realm, which includes 
the first meditative trances. 

Srilata says that the organs of taste and smell do not function in 
those trances. However, we think that if tastes and smells are lacking 
there the organs of taste and smell should also be absent. 

Vaibhasika: No, the organs of taste and smell must be there, but 
only because it makes a more elegant account. 


520 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


31.(E87; T96) All material elements except the three mentioned 
(viz., mind, mental awareness, factor element) are always 
contaminating. 

33.(E89-90; T97-98) Vaibhasika: There are three kinds of 
conceptual constructions: (1) essential, (2) defining and (3) 
mnemonic. The five awarenesses are essential but not defining or 
mnemonic. That is why the five sensory awarenesses, though involving 
initial and sustained thought, are still constructionfree. 

34.(E91; T99) For instance, the visible is appropriated if it is an 
integral part of a sense-organ, but not if it is external. 

35.(E92-95; T99-101) Bhadanta Buddhadeva claims that all 
sensory organs and their objects consist of the primary material 
elements only. No, says the Vaibhasika, the characteristics of the 
material elements (cf. I, 12) are perceived by the tactile consciousness 
only. The ten material elements are accumulations of atoms. 

36.(E95-96; T102) The visibles, olfactories, gustatories and 
tangibles can cut, burn or weigh if they form what is conventionally 
called, e.g., an "axe". They can be cut, etc., when they form e.g. 
"wood". Cutting means making two series of material factors, or more, 
out of one. The organs can neither be cut nor can they cut. For 
instance, if one cuts all the limbs from a body, which is the sensory 
element underlying tactile sensations, the body will still feel tactually, 
and the cut limbs will no longer be sensory elements of touch. Sound 
does not cut, cannot be cut, and has no weight. According to some, 
that external material sensory elements excluding sound burn and 
have weight is a characteristic of one kind of secondary materiality 
only. 

37.(E96-99; T103-105) Sounds may grow through nourishment, as 
vocal powers are diminished in a famished series. Which of the sensory 
domains are outflows? An "outflow" is where the result of a preceding 
factor closely resembles its cause--this is the case when one says that 
the same object is existing from one moment to the next, for actually 
it is a new factor entirely, but so similar to the preceding factor that the 
difference is not noticed. The five material internal sense-bases are 
outflows when they are also karmic results and grow through 
nourishment. 

Objection: Sound may be the result of karmic maturation, because 
that pleasant voice called "sound of Brahma” is the result of complete 
avoidance of harmful language. 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 521 


Vaibhasika: This sound does not result immediately from the action 
of which you suppose it is the maturation; thus it is not the result of 
karmic maturation. 

Objection: In that case, a bodily sensation could never be the result 
of karmic maturation, because it does not result immediately from an 
action, but rather from a change in the great elements resulting from 
the action. 

Vaibhasika: But this sensation is never engendered by the desire to 
have the sensation, whereas sound may be engendered by the volition 
to make the sound. 

38.(E101-103; T106-107) Whether acquisition of the visual organ 
and awareness occur together or separately depends, among other 
things, on what meditative trance state we are thinking of. 

39.(E104-109; T109-111) Objection: How can one talk about what 
is "personal" when there is no self? 

Answer: It is consciousness that is falsely called a "self". So the 
"personal" elements are awarenesses or supporting objects of 
awarenesses. 

A sensory element is termed "homogeneous" (sabhaga) with a time 
when it functions, "partially homogeneous" (tatsabhaga) with a time 
when it doesn't function. The sensory element called "mental 
consciousness" is always homogeneous with the time when it is 
destined to arise, for it always has an object; thus it can be called 
"partially homogeneous" only when it doesn't arise completely. A 
visible element is homogeneous with a series which sees it, partially 
homogeneous with one which doesn't. 

40ab.(E109-110; T111-112) The fifteen are ten material elements-- 
organs and objects--and five elements of consciousness. The "last 
three" (of the eighteen elements)--the mental element, element of 
factors, and mental consciousness element--comprise three sorts of 
factors: (a) eighty-eight proclivities, abandoned by vision, (b) the rest 
of the proclivities, abandoned by meditation, and (c) the 
noncontaminating unconditioned factors, not to be abandoned. 

Objection: Ordinariness, a neutral factor, as well as bad bodily or 
vocal karma, are classified by you as factors to be abandoned by 
meditation, whereas they are in fact abandoned by the path of vision. 

41.(E110-113; T113-114) The "eight parts of the factor element" 
are the five false views, ordinary right view, the disciple's and the 
adept's view. 


522 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


42.(E113-118; T114-118) Vijiianavadin: If the eye sees, then the 
eye of someone completely engrossed in a tactual or audial 
consciousness also sees. 

Vaibhasika: Not every eye sees. But every homogeneous eye does. 

Vijfianavadin: What sees is the visual consciousness. 

Vaibhasika: No, because when an object is obstructed by a screen it 
isn't seen. The visual consciousness is not material, thus it exercises no 
resistance. Thus it should be able to penetrate a screen. 

Vijianavadin: No. The visual consciousness simply doesn't arise 
when the object is obstructed. 

Vasubandhu: Does the eye perceive its object by entering into close 
proximity with it, as does the tongue? If not, why can't the eye see an 
obstructed object? And why does the eye see objects that are 
obstructed by glass, etc.? I say it is the visual consciousness which sees, 
but it needs light on the object for this seeing. 

Vaibhasika: There is a sutra which says that the eye sees. 

Vasubandhu: What that stitra means to say is that the visual 
consciousness sees through the locus of the visual organ. For there is 
also a stitra which says that mind discerns factors, but a mental 
moment is already past by the time factors are cognized (cf. 1, 17). It 
is really the mental consciousness which grasps factors. Another siitra 
states clearly that the eye is the medium for seeing. 

Vaibhasika: If the visual consciousness sees, what is it that discerns 
an object? 

Vasubandhu: Whatis the difference between seeing and discerning 
an object? It is the same process designated in two different ways. 

Vatsiputriya: It is the visual consciousness which sees. If the eye 
sees, what exactly is the action of seeing which you attribute to the 
visual organ? 

Vasubandhu: Your objection doesn't hold. For the distinction 
between agent and action can't be made. 

Dharmaguptaka: It's the visual consciousness which sees, but since 
the eye is the support of this consciousness, one says that it sees. 

Vaibhasika: In that case, one should also say that the eye cognizes, 
because it is the locus of visual consciousness. 

Vasubandhu: No. In ordinary language one never says that a color 
is cognized; one says that it is seen. Even the Vibhasd itself admits that 


that which is "seen" is reached by the eye, but is experienced by the 
visual consciousness. 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 523 


Sautrantika: This discussion is vain. There is no organ which sees, 
nor an object which is seen, there is no action of seeing, and no agent 
who sees. There is nothing but the interplay of causes and effects. Itis 
only metaphorically that one can talk about the eye seeing, 
consciousness discerning, etc. 

43.(E118-122; T119-122) If some kind of proximity isn't necessary 
(as the Vaibhasika says) why is it that one can't see things very far 
away? 

Vaibhasika: Some distance is necessary between the eye and a 
visible thing for sight to take place. For the eye doesn't see objects 
clearly that are laid directly on it. 

Vasubandhu: The ear may hear sounds within itself: thus the same 
kind of distance from the object isn't necessary. What is even the 
meaning of "coming directly in touch with"? 

Vaibhasika: It means that there is no object coming in between the 
object of sense and the organ. According to Bhadanta Dharmatrata, it 
means that there is no interval between them, but this interpretation 
is erroneous, because atoms don't enter into direct contact with one 
another. If atoms touched completely, they would merge. If atoms 
touched partially, there would be parts to atoms, but atoms have no 
parts. 

Vasubandhu: But if atoms don't touch each other, why does the 
aggregation of atoms not fall into pieces when it is struck? 

Vaibhasika: Because the wind-element gives them cohesiveness. 
Aggregates of atoms do have parts, and thus touch. 

Vasubandhu: Bhadanta Dharmatrata is right. There is no contact 
between atoms. One merely says there is when there is nothing coming 
between them, and no interval between them. If atoms had an interval 
between them, the atoms could float into it, and they would no longer 
be separate. The reason two atoms do not merge even though there is 
no interval between them is that they exercise resistance. One cannot 
make a radical distinction between atoms and aggregates of atoms. 
Thus it is absurd to say that aggregates touch but individual atoms 
don't. If you admit any spatial division for atoms, then atoms have 
parts. 

44.(E123-125; T122-125) For the organs of smell, taste and touch 
there must be the same number of atoms in the object as in the organ 
in order that the former be perceived. But for the organs of sight and 
hearing there is no such restriction: sometimes the object may be 


524 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


bigger, sometimes smaller than the organ. 

The atoms of the visual organ are situated on the pupil of the eye, 
the atoms of the audial organ are within the oak-leaf-shaped 
configuration within the ear, the atoms of the olfactory organ are 
within the nostrils, and the atoms of the gustatory organ are on the 
upper surface of the tongue. The atoms of the visual, hearing, smelling 
and tasting organs can all occur simultaneously (cf. I, 39), but not all 
atoms of the tactile organ can occur simultaneously. Always more 
than one atom must occur simultaneously for perception to take place. 
Thus individual atoms can't be perceived. 

Are the supporting objects for consciousnesses also their directly 
antecedent conditions? (A directly antecedent condition is any 
condition which helps give rise to a factor which is similar to it and 
which follows upon it immediately--cf. II, 62.) The eye is only the 
support for a visual consciousness, and not its directly antecedent 
condition, since it does not condition the nature of the consciousness. 
The mental factors which arise immediately previous to a 
consciousness-moment are always its directly antecedent conditions, 
since they not only help give rise to the consciousness-moment but 
color its very nature. As regards a mental consciousness, its supporting 
objects are always also its directly antecedent conditions, though again 
there are directly antecedent conditions which are not its supporting 
object, namely the mental factors still more antecedent. 

45.(E123-126; T125-126) If the eye is feeble, the consciousness is 
too. The object, on the other hand, has no such direct effect on the 
consciousness. 

48.(E132-133; T130-131) Everything perceived by the other 
consciousnesses is sorted and discerned by the mental consciousness. 
The unconditioned factors (I, 4-5) are eternal. There are twenty-two 
faculties, factors which have a predominance for the psychophysical 
complex. They are the faculties of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, tactile 
body, mind (meaning all six consciousnesses), femininity, masculinity, 
vitality, satisfaction, frustration, contentedness, irritation, equanimity, 
faith, energy, mindfulness, meditation, insight, coming to know what 
wasn't known, understanding, and perfect knowledge. (For definitions 
of these see Chapter Two.) 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 525 
CHAPTER TWO 


1.(E135-139; T153-155) Vaibhasika: The five faculties of the eye, 
ear, nose, tongue, and tactile body are predominant in explaining four 
things: (1) the beauty of an organism, (2) its protection--since through 
them the harmful can be avoided, (3) the organism's ability to see and 
hear, and (4) its special sphere of activity: seeing visibles, hearing 
sounds, etc. The four faculties of masculinity, femininity, vitality and 
the mental faculty are predominant in the two areas of continuation of 
the species and in differentiation of living beings. 

Objection: Even the individuals belonging to classes of gods who 
have no sexual organs can be differentiated. It is rather that the 
faculties of femininity and masculinity are predominant in the 
processes of thorough affliction and purification, since eunuchs and 
hermaphrodites can neither be totally subjected by mental afflictions, 
nor completely purified, nor can they attain attachment. 

Vaibhasika: The faculty of vitality is predominant in relating 
together all the elements taking part in an organism, and for the 
prolongation of the series of these elements until death. The mental 
faculty is predominant in the process of rebirth and for control, since 
all factors are subject to consciousness. The five faculties which are 
feelings--those of satisfaction, frustration, contentedness, irritation 
and equanimity--are predominant in the processes of affliction and 
alleviation. The faculties of faith, energy, mindfulness, meditational 
concentration, insight, coming to know what wasn't known, 
understanding and perfect knowledge are predominant in complete 
alleviation. 

Vasubandhu: It is not the organs of sense which are predominant in 
the protection of the organism, but the consciousness of sense! 
Similarly, the "special sphere of activity" belongs to consciousness. 

2.(E140-141; T156) For instance, if the eye is dim, visual 
consciousness is indistinct. The faculties of masculinity and femininity 
really belong to the tactile body, but they are its part which are 
predominant for the organism's physical shape, types of gestures and 
wishes. 

3.(E141; T157) The faculty of vitality is predominant for the 
prolongation of the organism's existence, but not in relating together 
all the elements taking part in the organism, as this takes place 
through mind, or the collection of six consciousnesses. On the rest of 


526 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the faculties Vasubandhu has no disagreement with the Vaibhasikas. 

4.(E141-142; T157-158) The last three faculties are predominant 
in the acquisition of liberation. 

Objection: Why aren't other factors also faculties, such as the voice 
the hands, the feet, etc.? , 

5.(E142-143; T158) Answer: Because in giving the list of faculties 
the Buddha wanted to highlight the supports of consciousness and that 
which prolongs, afflicts, and purifies them. 

6.(E143-144; T159-160) On the other hand, the voice is not 
predominant in speech, as speech has to be learned. Hands and feet 
are not predominant in taking and moving, since "taking" and "moving" 
are really metaphors for something new arising in another locus 
immediately following upon something else (see Chapter Four), and 
snakes, etc., need neither hands nor feet to take or move. Similarly, the 
anus is not predominant for excretion, since heavy objects always fall 
in space, and it is the internal wind-element which really makes the 
excrement come out. 

: 8.(E147; T162) Equanimity involves no conceptual construction, no 

differentiation, so it is not differentiated into mental physical. , 

10.(E151-168; T165-171) When a perfected being deliberately 
prolongs his life, the faculty of vitality involved can no longer be 
karmic retribution, because it is then the result of an impulse. 

How can one say that the faculty of irritation is never retribution? 
Asutra says that a feeling experienced as irritation may be retributory. 

Vaibhasika: But the siitra doesn't mean to say that the irritation is 
the result of an action: it means only that the action is accompanied by 
a feeling of irritation. 

Vasubandhu: The same siitra speaks of feelings experienced as 

contentedness and indifference. To be consistent, you must interpret 
these expressions in the same way. 
; Vaibhasika: The same difficulty doesn't arise. The siitra may be 
interpreted as saying that contentedness and indifference are 
retributions in certain cases, or that the action is accompanied by 
contentedness or indifference. 


; Vasubandhu: But there is no logical ground for saying that irritation 
is never retribution. 

Picea Irritation is always caused by conceptual construction, 
when one thinks about what one fears or doesn't like. Being the result 
of conceptual construction, it isn't retribution. 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 527 


Vasubandhu: The same must hold for contentedness, which 
consequently can't be retribution, either. 

Vaibhasika: If you say that irritation is retribution, then when 
someone has committed a grave offence and feels regret, this is 
tantamount to saying that the retribution occurs immediately after the 
act, because regret is a kind of irritation. But we do not admit 
immediate retributions. 

Vasubandhu: But you do admit that contentedness is retribution, 
and yet this may occur immediately after a good act. 

Vaibhasika: People detached from any desires do not have the 
faculty of irritation, but they do have faculties which are retributional; 
thus the faculty of irritation is not retribution. 

Vasubandhu: But such people cannot have contentedness, which is 
retribution, either. They do have a contentedness which comes from 
meditation, but this is good and thus isn't retribution. 

Vaibhasika: They have contentedness, whether retribution or not. 

17-21.(E171-179; T179-184) Objection: Since (see Table I in the 
summary of the Kosa) only nine faculties are always ethically neutral 
features of a perfected being, why does the Jfidnaprasthana say that 
eleven are? 

Answer: That passage is speaking of one who is able to gain 
perfection--he may experience satisfaction or contentedness as well as 
equanimity, e.g., after backsliding. However, one cannot have more 
than one at any time. 

Further details about the faculties possessed in the different realms, 
and which go along with which. 

22.(E181-185; T185-188) Do conditioned factors arise 
independently, or do they sometimes arise necessarily together? 

Vaibhasika: Sometimes they must arise together. For instance, a 
molecule (samghataparamanu) must consist of at least eight actual 
entities: one atom of each of the great material elements (cf. I, 12), 
and four atoms of derived materiality, corresponding to the visible, 
smell, taste and tactile. The molecules making up the simplest sentient 
beings must consist of at least nine atoms, the eight mentioned above 
plus an atom of the sense of touch. 

Vasubandhu: If every molecule contains atoms of each of the four 
great elements, why is it that solidity is perceived only in some 
material agglomerations, heat only in some others, etc.? 

Vaibhasika: What is perceived is the element which is the most 


528 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


intense. 

Vasubandhu: How do you know that a molecule has elements which 
aren't perceived? 

Vaibhasika: But they are in evidence anyway. Solid things may 
become liquid, such as when iron is melted. Thus iron contains the 
liquid element "water". The element of fire exists in water, as it is 
colder or warmer. 

Vasubandhu: How can you maintain that air contains color? If each 
molecule contains at least one atom of the visible, then air should have 
color. 

Vaibhasika: This is a matter of faith, not of inference. Or else, one 
can say that color exists in air because the air carries odors, and odor 
is never dissociated from color. 

Vasubandhu: You say that a molecule must have at least eight 
atoms, which you sometimes call "substances" (dravya). Do you mean 
actual substances, which have an essential nature, or do you mean 
sense-fields, which have only distinctive general characteristics? In the 
first case, the minimum number of atoms given is too small, because 
the molecule must contain also a shape-atom, since several atoms are 
aggregated. It must also contain the derived materiality called 
"tactile", etc. In the second case, the proposed number of atoms is too 
large, because the great material elements are part of the tactile sense- 
field, and thus the molecule consists only of four entities: the visible, 
smell, taste, and the tactile. 

Vaibhasika: In our usage "dravya" may mean both a substance in the 
strict sense and a sense-field. Among the eight dravyas of the molecule 
there are four real dravyas, the four great elements, and four sense- 
fields, which are four kinds of derived materiality supported by the 
great elements. 

Vasubandhu: If each of the atoms of derived materiality is 
supported by four atoms of the great elements, then the molecule has 
twenty atoms or dravyas. Besides, your usage of the term "dravya" is 
ambiguous and capricious. 

23.(E186; T188-189) Vaibhasika: The conditioned factors 
constituting sentient beings always arise with possession, aconnector- 
factor linking them together. 

Vasubandhu: The accompanying mental factors may be divided into 
the following groups: generally permeating factors, those arising with 
every awareness; good permeating factors, those arising with every 





ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 529 


good awareness; defiled permeating factors, those arising with every 
bad awareness; and limitedly defiled permeating factors, those arising 
with secondary afflictions. 

24.(E187; T190) Among the generally permeating factors, "contact" 
means the contiguity of organ, object of consciousness, and 
consciousness. 

28.(E194-195; T196) Some other accompanying mental factors are 
indeterminate: they can be associated with a good, bad or neutral 
awareness. They are regret, sleepiness, initial and sustained thought 
(see I, 32). 

31.(E200; T199) Arrogance may exist in all three realms of 
existence. 

33.(E204-207;T202-204) Vasubandhu: How can initial and 
sustained thought be associated with the same moment of awareness? 
The Vibhasa compares sustained thought to cold water, initial thought 
to the heat of the sun, and the awareness with clarified butter which 
is floating on the cold water. Because of the water and the sun, the 
clarified butter is neither too liquid nor too compact. In the same way, 
initial and sustained thought may be associated with the same 
awareness: initial thought makes the awareness not too subtle, and 
sustained thought makes it not too gross. 

But, for the simile to be exact, initial and sustained thought are not 
the grossness and subtlety of awareness, but the causes of grossness 
and subtlety of awareness. Besides, "grossness" and "subtlety" are 
relative. For instance, the awareness of the first meditational state is 
subtle in relation to an awareness of the realm of desires, but gross in 
relation to an awareness of the second meditational state. And if initial 
and sustained thought are grossness and subtlety of awareness 
respectively, then they would continue to exist even up to the next to 
the last of the highest immaterial meditations. But in fact they both 
cease after the second meditational state. Besides, it is not logical that 
"grossness" and "subtlety" can establish a specific difference. According 
to the Sautrantikas, initial and sustained thoughts are not separable 
events but the collection of awarenesses and mental factors which 
make for speech and inner discursiveness. 

Vaibhasika: But what is the objection to having a subtle and gross 
factor coexist with one awareness? 

Vasubandhu: There is no objection if the two factors are specifically 
different--for example, if there is a gross feeling and a subtle awareness 


530 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


coexisting. But if one is speaking of two states of one kind, then itis a 
contradiction to speak of them as being subtle and gross 
simultaneously. 

Vaibhasika: But there is a specific difference between initial and 
sustained thought. This difference is difficult to indicate, but it is 
manifested by the feebleness or strength of an awareness. 

Sautrantika: Feebleness and strength do not demonstrate the 
presence of two factors which are specifically different; for each 
specifically different factor, there may be feebleness or strength. 

Vasubandhu: Initial and sustained thought do not coexist with the 
same awareness. They exist successively. 

35-36.(E211-218; T207-213) Vasubandhu: How can you 
demonstrate the existence of possession? Such a thing can neither be 
directly perceived, nor can it be inferred from its efficacy. 

Vaibhasika: Possession does have efficacy, for it is the cause of the 
arising of events. 

Vasubandhu: This reply will get you in trouble. You say that one can 
possess the two kinds of cessation (see I, 4-5), yet these are 
unconditioned, and hence don't arise. And as for conditioned factors, 
there can't be possession if they haven't yet arisen, nor can there be any 
for factors which have been abandoned by a change of realm of 
existence (see I, 30). So how can the first arise, and how can the 
second have arisen? 

Vaibhasika: The arising of these factors is caused by a possession 
which is simultaneous with them. 

Vasubandhu: If all factors arise because of possession, then there is 
no role for birth (jati) nor for the birth of birth, events which don't 
pertain to sentient beings wouldn't arise (since possession exists only 
in psychophysical complexes), and there would be no difference in 
degree of the afflictions "possessed" by one in the realm of desires. If 
you say that these differences arise from causes other than possession, 
we will simply maintain that these other causes are the sole causes, 
and ignore possession. 

Sarvastivadin: Possession is not the cause of the arising of factors, 
but it is the cause of their particular states. If you suppose there is no 
possession, what difference is there between a noble person, in the 
moment in which he has a worldly awareness, and an ordinary person? 
For us, the difference lies in the fact that the noble one, even when he 
has a worldly awareness, is still connected by possession to undefiled 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 531 


consciousness, while for those at (b), the summit, one practising the 
cessation-trance has hardly any consciousness at all. 

12d.(E411-419; T387-391) Vibhajyavadin: There are three ways of 
being liberated while in the intermediate state: (1) as soon as one 
arrives there (dhatugata), (2) while ideas of material things are still 
operative (samjfdgata), (3) while thoughts are occurring 
(vitarkagata). 

13-14.(E419-426; T391-394) Objection: If the one in the 
intermediate state has the form of his next birth, then if an embryo dies 
in the womb of a dog and is replaced by the intermediate state of one 
going to burn in hell, the dog's womb will get burned! 

Answer: Intermediate state "bodies" are neither visible nor tangible. 

An intermediate being is the size of a five-year-old but has fully 
developed organs and, for modesty's sake, is clothed. 

There is no intermediate existence in the immaterial realm. 

How long does an intermediate existence last? Different opinions: 
no fixed time; seven days; seven weeks; for various periods depending 
on circumstances. 

15.(E427-429; T395-396) The intermediate being sees, through its 
divine eye, its parents copulating, and because of its own desire for the 
parent of the opposite sex hates the other parent as a rival and seeks 
sexual satisfaction. Thus, arriving at the place of copulation the 
intermediate being enters the semen and blood of its parents and 
ceases to exist (as intermediate) as its aggregates harden. 

The question arises: where do the organs, etc. of the new body come 
from? Two answers are possible: (1) they come from the intermediate 
being's organs, (2) organs arise from actions that create new elements, 
like leaf-worms. These descriptions apply to those born from eggs and 
from the womb. "Others", i.e., moisture-born ones, "go motivated by a 
place's smell or", in the case of magical beings, "from a desire for a 
place of residence." How can one desire residence in hell? Through 
confusion--being cold, one seeks a hot place! 

24.(E439-440; T404-405) But one can also interpret the entire 
twelvefold dependent origination formula as taking place in a single 
moment, when the factor-complex is linked with defilements: there is 
ignorance there, conditioning factors in the form of a volition-moment, 
there is a consciousness-moment, there are the other aggregates 
accompanying this moment, there are the organs in relation to the 
psychophysical complex, there is contact, a feeling, a cognition- 


532 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


definition of one who is separate from dharma? 

Vaibhasika: All three. 

Vasubandhu: In that case the Buddha, because he doesn't have all 
three kinds of patience, would become one separate from dharma. 

Vaibhasika: But we intend a nonpossession of patience which isn't 
accompanied by possession. 

Vasubandhu: Why bring up these totally hypothetical entities? 
According to Sautrantikas the state of being separate from dharma is 
simply a series where the factors of the path have not arisen. 

Vaibhasika: Nonpossession ceases with the arising of possession, or 
by a change of experiential sphere (cf. I, 30). 

Vasubandhu: When one exchanges experiential spheres there is 
nonpossession of the nonpossession of the new sphere. But can there 
be such a thing? Doesn't this lead to infinite regress? 

Vaibhasika: No, because one has a possession by possession of 
possession, and that possession of possession by the same possession. 

Vasubandhu: When a good factor arises in a series three factors 
must co-arise: the good factor, its possession, and the possession of 
that possession. In the next moment, six factors co-arise: the 
possession of the good factor, the possession of the possession of the 
previous moment, the possession of that possession, and three 
possessions of possessions for the three possessions. In this way, 
possessions will keep increasing from moment to moment. It's very 
fortunate that they're immaterial, otherwise there'd be no room for 
them! 

41a.(E232; T221) Vasubandhu: There is no special factor called 
"homogeneity within a lifetime". Such a postulate reeks of Vaisesika. 
The homogeneity of factors in an organism can be explained in other 
ways. 

41b-42.(E233-236; T221-224) Nonideation stops awareness and 
the arising of factors. One who does not conceptually identify in this 
way remains so for a long time, and dies immediately in heaven, being 
born again later in the realm of desire. 

There are said to be two meditational attainments, the nonideation 
trance and the cessation trance. Noble persons do not place any value 
on the nonideation trance. Ordinary people do not value it either, and 
so do not reap its reward. "It is experienced at one time’, i.e., in the 
present alone. 

43.(E236-238; T225-26) "Two sorts or neutral", i.e., its karmic 


wears 


SasuoeaNaane 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 533 


maturing takes place either in the next life or later at the summit of 
existence, or else it is unnecessary in the case of one who achieves 
parinirvana in this life. 

44.(E238-248; T226-233) Although the "Western masters" 
(Sautrantikas?) believe the Buddha first attained cessation-trance as 
an adept and subsequently became liberated, the Vaibhasikas deny 
this, holding that a Buddha needs only thirty-four moments as adept 
(sixteen moments of realization of the noble truths and eighteen 
moments abandoning the defilements), with awareness of destruction 
(of defilements) constituting the final step in which one abandons the 
summit of existence. 

"One's first cessation-trance must occur as a human", for a human 
can fall from it. Other schools' opinions about backsliding are 
reviewed. 

In the two meditational attainments the series of awarenesses is 
interrupted for quite some time. When there is emergence from the 
trance, how is it that awareness again arises, since the series has been 
interrupted? 

Vaibhasika: There is no difficulty for us, because past factors exist 
(see V, 25). Thus the awareness which entered into the attainment is 
the directly antecedent condition (cf. I, 44) for the awareness which 
emerges from the attainment. 

Some Sautrantikas say that the awareness which emerges comes 
from the body fitted out with its faculties, not from a previous 
awareness. Bhadanta Vasumitra, in his treatise Pariprecha, says that 
there is a subtle awareness existing during cessation which is the cause 
of the awareness on emerging. Ghosaka, however, argues that all 
awarenesses must be accompanied by the generally permeating factors 
(see II, 24). And since the generally permeating factors include 
feelings, identifications, and volition, the presence of awareness is 
required and cessation would be impossible. 

Bhadanta Vasumitra: A siitra says that feelings give rise to desires, 
and yet this isn't the case for perfected beings, for example. So not all 
contacts involve feelings. 

Ghosaka: But the sutra clearly says that it is feelings arisen from a 
contact accompanied by ignorance that give rise to desires, but 
contacts invariably give rise to feelings. 

Bhadanta Vasumitra: If there is no awareness in the meditative 
attainment, how can one even call it an "attainment"? 


534 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Ghosaka: It is designated that way because the great elements have 
reached an equilibrium which is counteractive to the arising of 
awarenesses. 

Vasubandhu: Should these meditative attainments be considered to 
be existing in themselves as actual entities, or only as designations for 
awarenesses not arising in the series? 

Ghosaka: They are entities because they prohibit awarenesses from 
arising. 

Vasubandhu: Butit isn't the meditative attainment which prohibits 
them from arising; it's the awareness which enters the attainment that 
prohibits further awarenesses from arising. 

Ghosaka: If the attainment is not an entity, how can it be considered 
aconditioned factor? 

Vasubandhu: It is designated as a conditioned factor because it has 
a beginning and end. But really there is no such factor as "attainment 
of cessation". 

45a.(E248-255; T233-239) Vasubandhu: Where is the life-force 
located? 

Vaibhasika: In heat and consciousness. 

Vasubandhu: If these three factors are located in each other and 
continue to exist in series, how do they ever end? Which of the three 
ceases first? 

Vaibhasika: Vitality is located in karma; when karma ceases vitality 
does too. 

Vasubandhu: Then why don't you say that heat and consciousness 
are located in karma and dispense with vitality? 

Vaibhasika: That which is located in karma is by necessity karmic 
maturation. If consciousness were supported by karma alone, then all 
life states would be maturations, which isn't the case. 

Vasubandhu: So you say that karma supports the bodily heat and 
the consciousness. You still don't need a separate vitality. 

Vaibhisika: It is necessary, because in the immaterial realm there 
is no heat. 

Vasubandhu: Consciousness in the immaterial realm could be 
supported by karma. 

Vaibhasika: You are twisting your own thesis. Before, you said that 
consciousness is supported by heat, and now you say it's supported by 
karma. 

Vasubandhu: I don't deny that there's something like vitality, only 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 535 


I don't think it's a separate kind of entity. It is just a force in past acts 
which allows the aggregates to renew themselves in a series. 

The Prajfiaptisastra lists four kinds of death: (1) by maturation of 
the karma from the present life; (2) by maturation of experiencings; 
(3) by both (1) and (2); (4) by not avoiding calamities. To these 
should be added (5) death by abandoning the life-faculty. 

Citing the Jii@naprasthana as authority it is explained that if one is 
in the realm of desire and not in either nonideation or cessation trance 
then the life-faculty ends when one's body ends. If one is in either of 
those trances or in a higher realm, life goes on for its allotted length. 

An extended discussion concerns precisely which beings--gods, 
those in hell or the intermediate state, etc.--are destined to live out 
their allotted time, and which can be terminated by external forces or 
by themselves. 

46bd.(E256-269; T240-249) Birth, duration, etc., are not entities 
apart. There are three instruments of knowledge: perception, 
inference, and reliable authority. By none of the three can these 
characteristics be established as entities apart. 

Vaibhasika: But there is a stitra which says that arising can be 
discerned. 

Vasubandhu: You are just like the fools who think that a series of 
factors forms a self. What the siitra wants to say is that the members of 
the series are conditioned, i.e., arisen by dependent origination. A 
series begins, a series continues, a series evolves, and a series ceases. 
One may say that in each moment these characteristics exist, but only 
if one knows that they're not separate entities. For each factor arises 
after having not existed, it exists for a moment, transforms in this 
moment, and ceases. 

Vaibhasika: But some factors have no duration or transformation-- 
some just have arising and ceasing. According to you, arising is the 
factor itself when it exists after not having existed. There is thus no 
difference between characteristic and characterized. 

Vasubandhu: So what? The horns of a cow aren't something 
different from the cow. If for every adjective which can be imputed to 
an event or collection of events you posit an entity to explain it, then 
there must be an entity underlying "one", "two", "large", "small", etc. 
and you will, like the Vaisesikas, be asserting an entire series of special 
entities like their number, extension, individuality, etc. Sure, one says 
"the birth of a color", but this doesn't mean that "birth" and "color" are 


536 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


two separate entities. One can also say "the torso of a body": this 
doesn't mean that the torso is an entity separate from the body. 

Vaibhasika: With the entity birth we can easily explain why the 
unconditioned factors don't arise. 

Vasubandhu: I say that conditioned factors arise because they exist 
having not existed. But the unconditioned is eternal, so how could it 
arise? 

47.(E271-276; T251-254) Vasubandhu: Aren't all three collections 
speech (vac), and consequently sound (Sabda), and thus belong 
among the material aggregates, not conditioning factors? 

Vaibhasika: If they were only sound there would be no way to 
distinguish meaningless from meaningful sounds. 

Vasubandhu: When I say "speech" I don't mean just sound, but 
sounds which human beings have agreed to mean certain things. But 
once this agreement has been made, the vocal sound itself gives rise to 
an understanding of the meaning. So there is no necessity for a special 
entity "word". 

Vaibhasika: We say that vocal sound produces a word, which is 
something separate. . 

Vasubandhu: But it is absurd to assume that vocal sound produces 
an entity "word", for the vocal sounds making up a word don'tall exist 
at the same time. The sounds are heard successively, and if the "word" 
is an entity it can't be produced by parts. 

Vaibhasika: The case is analogous to that of unmanifest karma (see 
I, 11). Itis the last moment of a manifest bodily or verbal action which 
produces unmanifest karma, but this last moment depends on the 
previous moments of the action. 

Vasubandhu: If the last moment of sound produces the word, then 
it would suffice to hear the last moment of vocal sound in order to 
understand the word. If you say that the syllables bring about a word, 
the same objection holds as before, because the syllables are produced 
successively. I hold that it is the syllables which ultimately exist, and 
that the word is a composite of syllables, with no more unity than a 
row of ants or a series of awarenesses. 

50.(E280-283; T256) Though one can call all causes "efficient 
causes", the term is more specifically used for a generative cause. Thus 
the eye and color are efficient causes of visual consciousness. 

51.(E283-291; T257-262) The "two restraints" are meditative 
trance and pure restraint. 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 537 


Vaibhasika: Simultaneous causes are factors related as cause and 
effect which coexist in the same moment, such as an awareness and its 
accompanying mental factors. 

Sautrantika: No such thing as a simultaneous cause can exist, 
because a cause must precede its effect. 

Sarvastivadin: A light arises at the same time as its Juster, and yet 
the light is the cause of the luster. 

Sautrantika: The light and its luster are both effects of a complex of 
anterior causes: the oil, the wick, etc. 

Sarvastivadin: The relation of cause and effect is demonstrated by 
the existence or nonexistence of that which is called an effect in 
relation to the existence or nonexistence of that which is called cause. 
Where A isn't, B isn't--thus A is the cause, B the effect. 

Sautrantika: How can simultaneous factors stand in a cause-effect 
relation? 

Sarvastivadin: Just as three sticks may stand because they support 
each other, so awarenesses and mental factors support each other. 

Sautrantika: But anterior causes have gone into this result of three 
sticks supporting each other. And besides, there are other causes here 
too, such as the earth, a string, etc. 

52.(E292-302; T262-269) An example of a homogeneous cause is 
the first stage of an embryo's existence, which is the cause of the later 
stages. 

The question whether a later factor can be the cause of an earlier 
one is discussed, citing Jfanaprasthana both for and against. 
Vasubandhu's answer is "no". 

54.(E310-316; T274-277) Neutral factors are not retributive causes, 
because a retribution is caused only by a factor which is conjoined with 
craving. Factors which are never linked to defilements can only be 
karmically neutral. (Note the distinction between that which is 
intrinsically good--the factors which are never linked to defilements-- 
and those which are karmically good--the good potentially linked with 
defilements.) 

55.(E319-327; T278-286) How can an unconditioned factor be an 
efficient cause? Because it does not obstruct the occurrence of any fact, 
although, being timeless, it cannot produce a result. 

Sautrantika: An unconditioned factor can't be a cause at all. 

Sarvastivadin: Then how can it be the supporting object of the 
awareness of it? 


538 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Sautrantika: The "unconditioned factors" are merely absences. 
Space is just the absence of tangibles, calculated cessation the 
nonarising of future proclivities, uncalculated cessation the absence of 
any future factors at all arising. Other definitions are reviewed. 

Sarvastivadin: If unconditioned factors don't exist how can a sutra 
say, e.g., that detachment is the best of all the factors, since 
detachment (=cessation) doesn't exist? 

Sautrantika: Before, e.g., a sound occurs we speak of its prior 
absence; afterwards we speak of its posterior absence. To speak thus 
does not imply that the absence of sound exists; likewise for the 
absences which are the unconditioned factors. 

The rest of this lengthy discussion turns on the interpretation of 
sutras. 

61.(E342; T296) The four are causal, directly antecedent, 
supporting, and dominant causes. 

62.(E342; T297) There is discussion here of how many mental 
concomitants accompany the awarenesses that make up a series of 
factors, and of whether factors of a certain sort can only be a directly 
antecedent condition of another of that type or not. 

The dissociated conditioning factors and material factors are not 
directly antecedent conditions. Nor can future factors be so, despite 
passages in scripture that appear to imply it. 

63-64.(E352-355; T306-308) Theist: Factors arise in succession 
because of the desire of God that one factor arise now, another later. 

Vasubandhu: If that is so, then they don't arise from a single cause, 
but from the desires, which are plural. Since God is supposed to be 
nonmultiple, His desires should be so too, and thus there can only be 
simultaneous generation of everything. 

Theist: The desires of God are not simultaneous, because He takes 
notice of other causes. 

Vasubandhu: Then God is not the unique cause of all things. And 
the causes He regards depend upon other causes, ad infinitum. 

Theist: Well, let's admit that the series of causes has no beginning. 

Vasubandhu: In that case, the world has no beginning, and this is 
contrary to your thesis. 

Theist: But God wants things to arise successively. 

Vasubandhu: What advantages does God get from making things? 

Theist: It's for His own satisfaction. 

Vasubandhu: If He needs to do something for His own satisfaction, 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 539 


then He isn't really sovereign. And besides, to think that God takes 
satisfaction in all the suffering of the world, what kind of a God is this? 
If you admit any other causes at all, you can't claim that God is the 
unique cause. Maybe to avoid denying causes which are obvious, and 
to avoid claiming that God is active now, which isn't apparent, the 
theist will say that the work of God is His first creation. But then, since 
God is eternal, His creation will be eternal too. All theories of a unique 
cause, whether called "God" or "purusa" or "pradhana", are nonsense. 


CHAPTER THREE 


3.(E383-384; T366-367) The four immaterial varieties are the bases 
of space, consciousness, nothingness and neither-identification-nor- 
nonidentification. 

Whereas the awarenesses of material beings depend on matter, the 
streams of awareness of the immaterial realm depend on homogeneity 
and vitality. But what do those two depend on? On each other, say the 
Abhidharmikas, but we Sautrantikas say they need no support other 
than themselves. 

4.(E387-393; T371-374) The first four courses (of hell-dwellers, 
ghosts, animals and humans) and some of the fifth (gods) are in the 
realm of desire; the rest of the gods are in the other two realms. 

"Undefiled-neutral", i.e., those in the five courses are karmically 
conditioned. 

Another view is that the five courses are undefiled and good. But 
the Vaibhasikas say all five realms are undefiled-neutral, although 
some say they involve only karmically-produced factors, while others 
say that some factors are the result of growth. 

5.(E393-396; T374-377) Specifically, (1) humans and some gods 
of the first stage have differing bodies and ideas, (2) comprises 
Brahma and his associates, (3) contains the Abhasvara gods, the 
highest gods of the second stage, who are sometimes satisfied and 
sometimes experience neither satisfaction nor frustration, (4) are the 
Subhakrtsna gods, who experience only satisfaction, (5) are those who 
meditate on endless space, (6) those who meditate on endless 
consciousness, and (7) those who meditate on nothingness. 

6a.(E397-398; T377-378) "The remaining sorts of beings" include 
(a) those in the first three courses (hell, ghosts, animals) and (b) those 
at the summit of the fourth stage. For those in (a) experience limits 


540 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


consciousness, while for those at (b), the summit, one practising the 
cessation-trance has hardly any consciousness at all. 

12d.(E411-419; T387-391) Vibhajyavadin: There are three ways of 
being liberated while in the intermediate state: (1) as soon as one 
arrives there (dhatugata), (2) while ideas of material things are still 
operative (samjfiagata), (3) while thoughts are occurring 
(vitarkagata). 

13-14.(E419-426; T391-394) Objection: If the one in the 
intermediate state has the form of his next birth, then if an embryo dies 
in the womb of a dog and is replaced by the intermediate state of one 
going to burn in hell, the dog's womb will get burned! 

Answer: Intermediate state "bodies" are neither visible nor tangible. 

An intermediate being is the size of a five-year-old but has fully 
developed organs and, for modesty's sake, is clothed. 

There is no intermediate existence in the immaterial realm. 

How long does an intermediate existence last? Different opinions: 
no fixed time; seven days; seven weeks; for various periods depending 
on circumstances. 

15.(E427-429; T395-396) The intermediate being sees, through its 
divine eye, its parents copulating, and because of its own desire for the 
parent of the opposite sex hates the other parent as a rival and seeks 
sexual satisfaction. Thus, arriving at the place of copulation the 
intermediate being enters the semen and blood of its parents and 
ceases to exist (as intermediate) as its aggregates harden. 

The question arises: where do the organs, etc. of the new body come 
from? Two answers are possible: (1) they come from the intermediate 
being's organs, (2) organs arise from actions that create new elements, 
like leaf-worms. These descriptions apply to those born from eggs and 
from the womb. "Others", i.e., moisture-born ones, "go motivated by a 
place's smell or", in the case of magical beings, "from a desire for a 
place of residence." How can one desire residence in hell? Through 
confusion--being cold, one seeks a hot place! 

24.(E439-440; T404-405) But one can also interpret the entire 
twelvefold dependent origination formula as taking place in a single 
moment, when the factor-complex is linked with defilements: there is 
ignorance there, conditioning factors in the form of a volition-moment, 
there is a consciousness-moment, there are the other aggregates 
accompanying this moment, there are the organs in relation to the 
psychophysical complex, there is contact, a feeling, a cognition- 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 541 


moment, craving, grasping, rigidification of being, the arising of all 
these events (which is a kind of birth), their maturity (old age), and 
their cessation (death). 

25.(E441; T406) The "misunderstandings" arise from questions 
such as "Did I exist in the past?", "Will I exist in the future", "Where are 
we?", 

26.(E442-443; T406-407) Ignorance, craving, and grasping are 
defilements; conditioning factors and being are action. (This latter 
classification rests on the fact that mental action, the basic kind of 
action entailing retribution for Vasubandhu, is volition, the most 
important of the conditioning factors and the basis of being-again or 
rigidification of being. 

27.(E443-449; T407-410) Defilements breed defilements, as when 
grasping arises from craving. The basic members of dependent 
origination (i.e., those which are neither affliction nor action) give rise 
to other basic members, as when the psychophysical complex arises 
from consciousness during conception in the womb. They may also 
result in defilements, as when feelings give rise to cravings. Actions 
arise from defilements, as when ignorance gives rise to conditioning 
factors. And from action, the basic members may arise, as when 
conditioning factors give rise to consciousness. 

Vaibhasika: There is no infinite regress because ignorance itself also 
has a cause, unreasoned attention. It is not specifically mentioned in 
the formula because it is the same as grasping. 

Vasubandhu: How do you know this? It may be associated with 
grasping, but also with ignorance and craving. 

Vaibhasika: A careful examination brings the following results: with 
perfected beings, feeling is not the cause of craving, since only defiled 
feeling causes craving. That is, the kind of feelings that give rise to 
cravings is a contact accompanied by ignorance, and this is what one 
may call unreasoned attention. 

Vasubandhu: Some, such as the Mahisasakas, assert that dependent 
origination is an unconditioned factor. If one means by this that it's 
always by reason of ignorance that conditioning factors arise, etc., and 
thus dependent origination is in a sense eternal, this is true. But if one 
means that there is a special entity "dependent origination", then it 
isn't. 

28a.(E449-463; T410-419) A number of grammatical arguments 
here. 


542 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Various explanations are offered as to why the Buddha provides 
different definitions of dependent origination. Different 
interpretations of dependent origination are distinguished. 

30b.(E469-470; T422-424) Whatis "contact"? The Sautrantikas say 
that it's simply the meeting of sense-organ, object and consciousness. 
The Sarvastivadins say that it's a special entity associated with 
awareness, different from the meeting of the three. Srilata says that 
contact is the organ/object/consciousness which are related as cause 
and effect. How does the Sarvastivadin explain the sitra which clearly 
defines "contact" as the meeting together of the three? 

32ab.(E473-479; T427-433) Does a contact precede the feeling it 
produces, or is it simultaneous with it? 

Vaibhasika: They are simultaneous causes of each other. 

Sautrantika: Then they must be reciprocal causes of each other, and 
that is wrong. 

Vaibhasika: There is no fault. Causes sometimes precede their 
effects but are sometimes simultaneous with them. 

Srilata: The contact must precede the feeling. First there are organ 
and object, next there is contact, which is the coming together of three 
things: organ, object and consciousness. Following that arises the 
feeling. 

Vaibhasika: Then in the second moment there is consciousness but 
no feeling--how can that be? 

Srilata: The consciousness in the second moment is caused by an 
earlier contact. 

Vaibhasika: Then a feeling produced by visual contact would be 
produced by an earlier auditory contact, for example. That is 
impossible. 

Srilata: No. The consciousness of color is not contact but produces 
a feeling at t, while the consciousness of sound is contact but does not 
produce feeling at t. 

Vaibhasika: This contradicts the rule that all the generally 
permeating factors (including sensations, feelings, etc.) are associated 
with every awareness. 

Srilata: We do not recognize the authority for that "rule". Or, if you 
please, we have a different theory of "generally permeating factors". 
According to our (Sautrantika) theory, although the ten factors of 
consciousness, feelings, etc., occur in all the kinds of stages there are, 
it is not that every awareness includes each and every one of those 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 543 


factors. 

32cd.(E479-482; T431-433) There are six contented mental 
ponderings, six irritated ones, and six of equanimity. Each group has 
six since they relate to the five kinds of sense-objects and to factors as 
the sixth. 

What does "mental pondering" (manopavicara) mean? The 
Vaibhasikas say that the mind supports the contentment, irritation and 
equanimity with which sense-objects are grasped. Another opinion is 
that these eighteen cause the mind to reconsider sense-objects, etc. 

Objects are not satisfying, irritating, etc. by nature, but may be 
satisfying for one person, irritating to another, etc. But all mental 
ponderings are impure. 

37d-38c.(E491; 1438-439) The "four states of existence" are 
intermediate existence, rearising, living and dying. 

98.(E554-555; T487-488) The KoSa's theory of "social contract": 
Originally, when rice was first used by human beings as food, it was 
gathered not cultivated, and one cut it once in the morning for the 
morning meal, once again in the evening for the evening meal. But one 
person, who was too lazy to want to do both cuttings, cut a lot at a 
morning cutting and saved some for his evening meal. Others imitated 
him. With this storing of food arose the idea of "mine". The rice which 
was cut repeatedly ceased to grow. So efforts had to be made to make 
the rice grow--this was the beginning of agriculture. They divided the 
fields among themselves. But the stronger began to take away the 
fields of the weaker--this was the beginning of stealing. To prevent 
stealing, they held a meeting and gave a sixth of their produce to an 
outstanding man, who was told to guard the fields. The term "ksatriya" 
to denote the warrior-ruler class is derived from "ksetrapa”. The first 
ksetrapa, Mahasamata, made his office hereditary: this was the 
beginning of dynasties. Later there were many thieves and highway- 
robbers. The ksetrapa, or king as we call him now, punished them 
with the sword. Others said "We didn't do anything wrong"--this was 
the beginning of lying. 

99.(E556-557; T489) An eon ends when life expectancy is only ten 
years. 

100.(E557-563; T491-494) Vasubandhu's arguments against the 
Vaigesika conception of composite whole: 

(1) When the organ of the visual or tactile consciousness is 
in contact with one thread, the cloth is not perceived. If the composite 


544 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


whole "cloth" exists in each thread, it would have to be perceived even 
if only one of its threads is. 

(2) If the Vaisesika says that the composite whole does not 
exist within each of its parts, how will it be demonstrated that it is 
anything but the collection of these parts? 

(3) If the Vaisesika says that the composite whole does exist 
within each of its parts, but that perception of one thread does not 
result in the perception of cloth because the perception of cloth 
presupposes contact of the organ with several of the parts, then if one 
sees the border of a cloth one would see the whole cloth. 

(4) If the Vaisesika says that the perception of the composite 
whole depends upon the perception of its central and other portions, 
one would never see a composite whole, because one can never see its 
central- and end-parts simultaneously. 

(S) If the Vaigesika says that these parts are perceived in 
succession, then the perception of cloth does not differ from the 
perception of a "circle" that results from hurling a torch in full are. 
Objects of consciousness of such perceptions cannot be real entities in 
any way. 

(6) When threads of different colors come together to form 
a cloth, how can the cloth be considered an entity? According to 
Vaisesika, qualities like color must pervade their substances totally. 
Thus one substance can have only one quality of a type. So what does 
one do with a cloth of many colors? Unlike the Vaisesika atomic 
theory, which needs the composite whole because atoms are 
absolutely imperceptible, the Vaibhasikas state that atoms in 
aggregation are perceived. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


1.(E568; T552) The Vaibhasikas assume bodily and verbal karma 
also, which constitute manifest and unmanifest karma (see I, 11). 

2.(E569-570; T553-554) Vatsiputriya: If things are momentary 
what is the cause of their destruction? 
Vasubandhu: There is no special cause of destruction because 
destruction is an absence and absences need no causes. If things were 
Not arising and ceasing all the time, nothing could ever change at all. 
If you say that there is no more weighty means of cognition than direct 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 545 


perception, and that we can see wood being destroyed by fire, so that 
in this case a cause of destruction is directly perceived, we must 
investigate the phenomenon of combustion. Actually, we do not 
directly perceive the destruction of the wood: all we perceive is that we 
don't see the wood after its prolonged contact with fire. To say that the 
fire is the cause of the destruction of wood rests upon an inference, and 
what's more, an inference which isn't foolproof. It is equally possible 
to say that wood-moments are perishing incessantly of themselves, and 
arise again incessantly except when they come in relation with fire. 
You admit that the destruction of a flame occurs by itself. Even in the 
case when a gust of wind puts out a flame, you don't say it's the wind 
that is the cause of the flame's destruction; you say that the flame has 
ceased to renew “itself"--or rather the flame-series has ceased, because 
of "its" relation with wind. The same for a hand covering a bell: the 
hand simply impedes the renewal of the continuation of the sound- 
series, which would in any case cease by itself. 

3.(ES70-578; T554-560) If destruction needed a special cause, as 
arising does, then there would be no case of destruction without a 
cause. But you admit that awarenesses, flames, and sounds perish 
without a special cause. If one says that the destruction of wood takes 
place because of fire, then one has to admit that the generative cause 
of something can at the same time cause its cause destruction. For 
example, in the process of dyeing, the color of the object being dyed is 
changing from moment to moment. Thus the first with the dye-stuffs 
is both the cause of one color's arising and the cause of another's 
destruction, and subsequent moments of the fire-series are causes of 
the next color's destruction and another one's arising, etc. But it is 
impossible that the same kind of thing be both the generative cause 
and the cause of destruction of another kind of thing. I conclude that 
things cease because they are by nature momentary, and the other 
factors are catalysts only for the nonremoval of the series. Everything 
being momentary, no movement of the same thing is possible. 

As to the Vaibhasika theory that manifest bodily karma is a shape 
(the changing shapes of what is conventionally called "a hand moving", 
"lips moving", etc.), shape as a separate entity can't be demonstrated 
either. The visible can in fact be reduced totally to color. When there 
is color in one direction in great quantity, one calls it "long". When it 
is seen in small quantity one calls it "short". When it spreads in four 
directions one calls it "quadrangular" (caturasraka). When it is equal 


546 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in every direction from the center one calls it a "circle". 

What is termed "shape" is really perceived by two different kinds of 
organs. One can tell that something is "long" by the eyes, one can also 
do so by the organ of touch. 

Vaibhasika: But the tactual organs don't directly perceive shape: 
they only construe it from arrangements of the soft, hard, etc. 

Vasubandhu: In the same way, shape isn't directly seen by the eye, 
but construed from arrangements of color. 

Vaibhasika: When we get the idea of a shape from touch, it's not 
that touch directly perceives it--rather we remember the shape that we 
saw and tell by touch that the tactile sensation corresponds. Just as 
when we see the color of a fire we remember its heat, or when we 
smell the fragrance of a flower we remember its color. 

Vasubandhu: In this case, there is a strict correlation; fire is always 
hot, etc. But there is no tactile sensation which is invariably associated 
with a shape. In a variegated tapestry one sees various shapes. In the 
same part of it one can construe two or three different ones. Thus there 
are various kinds of visibles in one place, following your theory, and 
this is impossible. 

Vaibhasika: If shape isn't distinct from color, then the shape of one 
thing couldn't differ from another's when their colors are the same. 

Vasubandhu: No. "Long" refers to real things arranged in a certain 
way, just as ants may form lines or circles. 

Vaibhasika: When an object is far away one can see its shape before 
its color. 

Vasubandhu: Actually, one sees its color, but mainly indistinctly. 

Vaibhasika: Well, what is manifest karma to you, then? 

Vasubandhu: I admit that manifest karma is shape, but I deny that 
shape is a special sort of entity. 

Vaibhasika: But there must be a real entity underlying manifest 
karma. 

Vasubandhu: A bodily action is actually a thought which puts the 
body into activity. 

Vaibhasika: But a siitra clearly states that there are two kinds of 
karmic results: volition and the action after volition. How can you 
distinguish these? 

Vasubandhu: There are two kinds of volition. One is preparatory, 
the next is the thought "which raises a hand", etc. 

Vaibhasika: In that case, you're actually denying manifest karma as 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 547 


an entity. 

Vasubandhu: True. 

Vaibhasika: If there is no manifest action, unmanifest karma can't 
exist either, as it always depends on the manifest sort. 

Vasubandhu: The goodness or badness of a long-past decision 
brought into effect by others rests on the volition involved in that 
decision and its traces in the series. Thus, the concept of "unmanifest 
karma’ isn't necessary. 

4ab.(E579-590; T560-568) If you say that the siitras mention a kind 
of materiality which exercises no resistance, and that this must refer to 
unmanifest karma, I reply that someone in meditation may see a 
skeleton, etc., and yet this materiality occupies no locus and exercises 
no resistance. If you say that there is a siitra which says there is a 
materiality not liable to connection with proclivities this may also refer 
to such meditationally-seen materiality. If you say that there is a siitra 
which says that merit increases, this phenomenon can as well be 
explained as volition. If you say there is no way to make the instigator 
of a murder responsible for the act if there is no unmanifest karma, I 
say that the thought of the instigator is bad in itself and carries its 
retribution by a transformation of "his" series. 

Vaibhasika: Why this preference for a "transformation of a series"? 

Vasubandhu: Actually, both the theory of unmanifest karma and the 
theory of transformation of the series are difficult to demonstrate. But 
itis easier to see how a volition transforms a mental series than how a 
certain material factor suddenly arises which has nothing to do with 
the awarenesses of the instigator. If you say that without unmanifest 
karma there is no violation of the pratimoksa rules when a monk who 
has committed misdeeds does not admit them, the badness of this 
violation can be explained by me by his decision to stay silent. 

4cd.(ES90; T568) As soon as one performs an action those great 
elements constitute a set of unmanifest karma, which set then 
generates the set in the next moment, and so on, and thus karma is 
stored up for later retribution. 

8b.(ES97; T573) Actions are good or bad depending on the factors 
involved. Factors are good or bad (1) from the highest standpoint 
(e.g., liberation is absolutely good), (2) in terms of their intrinsic 
nature (e.g., medicine), (3) through their association with good or bad 
things (a particular medical treatment), (4) because of the goodness 
or badness of their cause (e.g., cow's milk). 


548 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


10.(E600; TS76) For instance, someone may have the intention to 
go to the village (inciting causal factor), but he may die at the next 
moment so no accompanying causal factor ever occurs. 

The kind of consciousness which is given up by seeing the four 
truths is an inciter only. The mental consciousness given up by 
meditation is both an inciter and an accompanying causal factor. The 
five sensory consciousnesses are inciters only. 

That which arises from retribution arises spontaneously, without 
any conditioning factors being necessary. Thus retribution is neither 
an inciter nor an accompanying causal factor. 

12.(E603-605; T579-580) According to you, is manifest karma 
good, bad or neutral according to the character of its inciter or of its 
accompanying causal factors? 

Vaibhasika: What is the point of this question? 

Vasubandhu: The view of a self in the body and views regarding the 
impermanence and permanence of the elements constituting 
personality are, according to you, inciters (see IV, 11). They are always 
obstructed but neutral (i.e., they are liable to be connected with 
afflictions, but are karmically neutral). If the manifestation which 
follows upon these views has the same karmic nature as they do, ithas 
to be unobstructed but neutral too. And according to you, a 
retribution-causing action which is unobstructed but neutral in the 
realm of desires does not exist. Or otherwise you must abandon your 
first thesis in IV, 11. As regards the view that manifest actions follow 
the karmic nature of their accompanying causal factors, the manifest 
action of a person undergoing monastic discipline could not be good 
in that case, if his awarenesses at the time are bad or neutral. 

Vaibhasika: The unmanifest karma has the same karmic nature as 
its inciter when it is an awareness susceptible to abandonment by 
meditation. It is not of the same nature as its inciter when it is an 
awareness susceptible to abandonment by right views, for example the 
awareness that the self exists, because in that case there is, in between 
the inciter and the manifest karma, another inciter, an awareness 
susceptible to abandonment by meditation, turned outwardly, 
accompanied by the initial and/or sustained thought (see Il, 33) which 
results in the view of a self. The first primary causal factor is neutral, 
the second is bad, the manifest karma is bad. From an inciter 
susceptible to abandonment by right view there arises another inciter 
susceptible to abandonment by meditation and which is good, bad, or 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 549 


neutral; from this second inciter arises manifest karma which is of the 
same nature. 

Vasubandhu: But if manifest karma is not good, bad or neutral 
according to its secondary causal factors, then your theory--that views 
are inciters, that they generate manifest karma, that an awareness 
susceptible to abandonment by right views doesn't engender a 
manifest karma, and that there is no manifest karma in the realm of 
desires which is obstructed by the neutral--becomes unintelligible. 

50.(E657; T625) "In this life, etc.": in this life, the next life, or one 
still later. 

Others say that karmic retribution that has begun to be experienced 
in one life can continue to be so in a later life. Others, the Vaibhasikas, 
disagree. 

51-52.(E558-560; T626-628) "Some others", viz., the Darstantikas, 
who classify karma into (1) karma whose time of maturation is 
determined but whose kind of maturation is not; (2) karma whose 
kind of maturation is determined but whose time is not; (3) karma 
whose time and kind of maturation are determined; (4) karma whose 
time and kind of maturation are not determined. 

There is no bad action in the three higher realms. Good actions in 
hell produce good or neutral karmic results in later existences, but not 
in hell itself, for there is no good retribution in hell. 

54.(E661; T630) All actions other than those mentioned are not 
determined. 

65.(E673; T639) The three bad practices that are not actions are 
covetousness, malice and false view. 

Darstantika: No, they are mental acts (citing textual authority). 

Vaibhasika: But siitras tell us that defilements are not actions (re- 
explaining the authoritative text cited). : 

67.(E676-677; T641-642) The principal six bad actions are the 
taking of life, stealing, offences of lust--as when one steals another's 
wife, or ravishes a young girl--false speech, slander, harsh or 
unconsidered speech. 

Vaibhasika: If one has someone else do such an act it constitutes his 
unmanifest karma, except for offences of lust, which must always be 
committed by the agent and so are always manifest actions. 

Vasubandhu: The entire Vaibhasika concept of manifest and 
unmanifest karma has already been rejected. It is the volitions to do 
these acts which are bad, as well as the volition which sets the body or 


550 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


voice into activity to perform them. 

"One bad action always of two kinds" is adultery, since one must do 
itin person. 

68.(E677-780; T642-646) The taking of life means the taking of 
animal as well as of human life. Even to willfully kill the smallest 
animal is a bad action, and carries a karmic retribution. In fact, it is 
even wrong to cut the leaves off a tree, or to trample down green 
plants so that they're destroyed. There are different motives for the 
taking of life: because of desire; for the sake of robbery; just for the 
"fun" of it; for the sake of defending oneself or others; because of 
hatred; because of false views, such as when a kind man thinks he has 
to have criminals executed, when the Persians think their old people 
should be killed, or when one says that one should kill snakes, 
scorpions, etc., or when one is convinced there is no future life or no 
retribution for killing. Stealing may also come about through desire, 
or through hatred, or from false views (such as when a king thinks 
criminals’ possessions can be taken away). Offences of lust may of 
course usually take place through desire, but also through hate and 
through false views, such as when the Persians have sexual intercourse 
with their mothers. False speech may also arise from the same three 
causes. 

73.(E685-687; T650-651) Objection: How can there be murder, 
since aggregates are momentary? 

Reply: Taking away the life of an aggregate-series is murder. 

According to the Jains, even nonintentional killing is murder. By 
analogy, even touching someone else's wife without her consent 
constitutes a case of adultery. And the Jain teachers are themselves 
guilty, because they preach terrible austerities. 

74.(E687-688; T651-653) "Four kinds of women"--intercourse with 
(1) those one shouldn't consort with (mother, daughter, another's 
wife), (2) one's wife in an improper way, (3) in an unsuitable place or 
(4) time. 

There are different views about the case of intercourse with 
someone mistaken for someone else. 

79-80.(E697-702; T659-663) Only humans can sever good roots, 
not animals, not gods, etc., and indeed only some humans, though 
opinions differ as to which. 

81.(E703-708; T664-666) There is retribution for each intended 
action. If someone has committed a murder he may be reborn as a 


oye 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 551 


human being, but his life will be either short or miserable. 

82-84.(E708-710; T666-668) E.g., killing doesn't occur in hell, nor 
do stealing or adultery or lying. Gods don't kill one another (though 
perhaps they can cut off each others' heads, etc.), but they can kill 
those in other realms. 

85.(E710-712; T669-670) E.g., the retributional result of bad action 
is a hellish existence. The outflowing result will lead to a short life; the 
dominant result of killing is reduction of life's force. Three results are 
rehearsed for each of the ten courses of bad action. 

95.(E721-722; T677-678) But the retributional effect of an act can 
occur only in the same life, or in the next life: itcannot extend for two 
lives after the act. Even though they have a retribution, the highest 
meditational attainments don't project an action, because they don't 
coexist with conscious action. There are three kinds of obstructions: 
obstructions due to past actions, obstructions which are defilements, 
obstructions which are retributional. 

96.(E722; T679) The obstructions due to actions are those coming 
primarily from the five grave offences: killing one's mother, killing 
one's father, killing a noble person, causing divisions in the order, and 
harming a Buddha. Itis a graver offence to kill one's mother than it is 
to kill one's father. 

97.(E724-725; T680-681) The five grave offences can't be 
committed by eunuchs, etc., and a human born of demons does not 
offend in killing his parents. 

103.(E730-732;T685-686) The same kind of gravity does not occur 
as in full-fledged cases if a person kills his mother thinking it’s someone 
else, or if he kills her accidentally. 

105.(E732-734; T688-689) The action which has the greatest good 
retribution is that mental action which allows entry into the highest 
meditational attainment. 

107cd.(E735; T690) The retributional effects of acts can be severed 
by the acquisition of perfect patience or forbearance, or by becoming 
a nonreturner or by becoming a noble person. 


CHAPTER FIVE 
1-2a.(E760-764; T767-771) It is because of the proclivities which 


have arisen in series that karma is accumulated for future retribution. 
Since to the Vaibhasika past and future factors don't change in 644 


552 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


fundamental nature, he can regard the traces and the defilements 
themselves as identical. For the Sautrantika, however, they are truly 
seeds of defilement, i.e., proclivities. 

Objection: What does the expression "attachment to sensual 
pleasure" mean? If one says that attachment to sensual pleasure is 
itself a trace, this contradicts the sutra which makes a distinction 
between attachment to sensual pleasure and its trace. If one interprets 
"attachment to sensual pleasure" to mean the trace laid down by 
attachment to sensual pleasure, then it would have to be for the 
Vaibhasika a possession, and would therefore be a conditioning factor 
dissociated from awareness. But this is in contradiction to the 
Abhidharma, which says that attachment to sensual pleasure can be 
accompanied by the three kinds of feelings (see I, 4), for a conditioning 
factor dissociated from awareness cannot be accompanied by feelings. 

Vaibhasika: The expression should be taken in the first sense. In the 
sutra, "trace" also includes all the defilement’s consequences. Besides, 
the traces cannot be dissociated from awareness, because they defile 
and so hinder awarenesses. 

Sautrantika: The expression should be taken in the second sense. 
But a trace is neither associated with an awareness nor dissociated 
from an awareness, because a trace is not an entity. A trace is simply 
a defilement-series in a nonmanifest state. It is a seed (bija). And by 
"seed" we mean a certain capacity or power (Sakti) to produce this 
defilement again, which has arisen from a past occurrence of the same 
kind of defilement. 

4.(E765-766; T773) All proclivities can be abandoned by the truth 
of frustration. Extreme beliefs can be abandoned by the truth of the 
origin of frustration and the truth of the cessation of frustration. 

5.(E766-768; T773-774) Attachment, repugnance, ignorance and 
pride can be abandoned by meditation. Other false views can be 
abandoned by all four noble truths, and so can attachment to views 
and perplexity. Adherence to rule and ritual can be abandoned by the 
truth of frustration and the truth of the path. Some people claim that 
a non-Buddhist can't abandon the traces which are counteracted by a 
knowledge of the truths. But yet these people may meditate, and be 
separate from the traces of the realm of desire. 

There are thirty-six proclivities in the realm of desire (twelve views, 
four perplexities, five attachments, five repugnances, five ignorances, 
and five prides), and thirty-one in each of the material and immaterial 





i 
{ 


canes 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 553 


realms; thus the total of ninety-eight. 

6.(E769-772; T774-776) Of the ninety-eight proclivities eighty- 
eight are destroyed by vision when calmed through patience; the other 
ten are destroyed by meditation. 

Can non-Buddhists destroy proclivities by vision? There are texts 
that speak of non-Buddhists detached from all views. But how can that 
be--they have not destroyed the views of the realm of desire? 

Vaibhasika: They lose that detachment when they accept a view. 

7.(E772-773; 1777-778) The five views explained (cf. V, 3 above). 
"Extreme beliefs" are beliefs in persistence or in nihilism. Although all 
five views listed in V, 3 are false, those classified as "false views" in the 
list are those that are the worst, e.g., denying the four truths. 
"Adherence to views" is to consider wrong views as right ones. And 
"adherence to mere rule and ritual" covers all sorts of false beliefs 
about causes and effects as well as about what is and is not the path. 

8.(E773-775; T778-780) The belief that suicide or asceticism is 
noble has nothing to do with the view of the permanence of the self. So 
how can one say that it is abandoned by the knowledge of the truth of 
frustration? It is rather the knowledge of the truth of the origin of 
frustration which makes for its abandonment. 

Vaibhasika: But this belief is an error concerning frustration. 

Vasubandhu: But it is equally an error concerning the path. 

There are four perverted views (meaning views which invariably 
give rise to frustration). They are: considering what is impermanent as 
permanent, what is frustrating as satisfying, what is impure are pure, 
what isn't self as self. 

9.(E778-780; T780-784) For the Sautrantika, but not for the 
Vaibhasika, the reversal relating to "self" also includes the belief in 
"mine", "my". 

10-11.(E782-785; T784-788) The seven kinds of pride are basic 
pride, greater pride, the pride that is more than pride, the pride of 
thinking "I am", conceit, the pride of deficiency, and false pride. Basic 
pride is any inflation of awareness which thinks "I am superior" or "I 
am equal" relative respectively to an inferior or an equal. Greater pride 
is thinking "I am superior" or "I am equal" in relation respectively to an 
equal or a superior. The pride of thinking "I am" is when the aggregates 
are taken asa self. Conceit is thinking one has attainments when one 
doesn't. The pride of deficiency is thinking one is only a little bit 
inferior to one vastly superior. False pride is thinking one has qualities 


554 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


one doesn't have. The Jfidnaprasthana, however, says that all of the 
following views are pride: "I am better", "I am equal", "I am worse", 
"Somebody else is better than me", "Somebody else is equal to me", 
“Somebody else is worse than me", "Somebody else isn't better than 
me", "Somebody else isn't equal to me", "Somebody else isn't worse 
than me". 

12.(E782; T788) There are eleven pervasive proclivities. 

25-26.(E803-808; T806-810) Vaibhasika: The proof of the existence 
of past and future as well as present lies in the fact that consciousness 
is the result of "two", its organ and its content. A mental consciousness, 
for instance, arises in regard to a content only when this object is 
already past, because it belongs to a previous moment. A factor can 
only arise with an existing object as content. If past and future factors 
did not exist, then there would be factors without objects. If the past 
did not exist, how could good and bad actions give their retribution? 
For when the retribution arises the actions are past. 

Explanations of the existence of past and future: (1) Bhadanta 
Dharmatrata: The manner of being of a factor in the three times 
differs, but the factor itself does not differ. Example: a golden vase 
which one makes into something else golden--its shape is altered but 
not its color. (2) Ghosaka: When a factor is past, it has the 
characteristic of a past event; but it is not disconnected from the 
characteristics of future and present factors. And so on for the rest. 
Example: A man attached to one woman isn't unattached to other 
women. (3) Bhadanta Vasumitra: Factors in the three times differ by 
their condition, not by their nature. Example: A bead in an abacus 
signifies "one" in the one-place, "ten" in the ten-place, etc. (4) 
Buddhadeva: The three times differ by relative otherness. That is, a 
factor is called present, future, or past in relation to what precedes and 
what follows. Example: The same woman isa daughter and a mother. 
To the Vibhdsa, Bhadanta Dharmatrata's view is untenable because it 
is the same as Samkhya's. Ghosaka's is untenable because factors in the 
three times are not distinguished. Buddhadeva's is untenable because 
the three times would exist at the same time, a past event, for instance, 
being both previous to and successive to other things would be both 
previous and subsequent, a moment could be both past and future, etc. 
Thus, says the Vibhdsa, the theory of Bhadanta Vasumitra is to be 
accepted. 

Vasubandhu: If the past and the future exist, then why call them 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 555 


"past" and "future"? 

Vaibhasika: When the factor exercises its function it is present. 
When it does not exercise its function it is future. When it has exercised 
its function and its function has stopped, then it is past. 

Vasubandhu: But a nonsimultaneous eye does not exercise its 
efficacy (see I, 39). Does this mean it isn't present? If you say that its 
function is to give and receive an effect, then homogeneous causes (see 
II, 59), which give their effect when past, are present when past. 

27.(E808-819; T810-820) If a factor exists always, why doesn't it 
always exercise its function? If its functioning ceases, why not the 
factor itself? 

Vaibhasika: A conditioned factor which hasn't yet arisen is called 
future; one having arisen but not having been destroyed is present; 
one which has been destroyed is past. 

Vasubandhu: If they all exist, how can they be not yet arisen or 
already destroyed? 

Vaibhasika: Because the essential nature of a factor continues to 
exist. 

Vasubandhu: How can you even talk about anything arising at all 
if everything exists all the time? 

Vaibhasika: But there is a siitra which says that past and future 
actions exist. 

Vasubandhu: The past is that which existed, the future is that which 
will exist. In this sense, they exist, but they don't exist in the way the 
present does. 

Vaibhasika: But I didn't say they exist as the present does! They exist 
in the manner of past and future. 

Vasubandhu: In the stitra the word "exists" is used in the same sense 
as when one says "there is (exists) nonexistence of the flame before it 
arises", etc. 

Vaibhasika: But there is a siitra which clearly says that past actions 
exist. 

Vasubandhu: That only means that past actions have exercised a 
function the results of which carry on into the present. Anyway, there 
is another stitra which says that the eye which arises came from 
nowhere, and the eye which ceases disappears. 

Vaibhasika: The expression "it exists after it was nonexistent" means 
only that after being nonexistent in the present it became existent in 
the present. 


556 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Vasubandhu: What does that mean? In this example the eye doesn't 
differ from present time. (In the Vibhasa time is explained as a 
conditioned event's arising and ceasing.) As to the argument that the 
past and future exist because consciousness arises as the result of past 
and future events, are these events really generative conditions of the 
consciousness, or only conditions inasmuch as they're its supporting 
objects? A future event, which may arise in a thousand years or may 
never arise, may of course be an object of consciousness (as an 
anticipation, for instance), but it is difficult to see how it can be the 
generative condition of a present factor. 

Vaibhasika: If past and future factors don't exist, how can they be 
objects of consciousness? 

Vasubandhu: Something which does not exist can be an object of 
consciousness, such as when there is consciousness of fantasies. 

Vaibhasika: If that which does not exist can be an object of 
consciousness, a thirteenth sense could be an object of consciousness 
too. (Remember there are only twelve sense-fields, see I, 14). 

Vasubandhu: What is the object of consciousness relating to the 
statement you have just made? If you say that "thirteenth sense" is only 
a name and no existent entity, then you have just admitted that an 
object of consciousness need not exist. What is the object of 
consciousness which relates to the consciousness of the prior absence 
of acertain sound? 

Vaibhasika: The object of consciousness is the sound itself and not 
its prior absence. 

Vasubandhu: But if a future sound, for which there is no prior 
absence, exists, why does one have the idea that it doesn't exist? 

Vaibhasika: It doesn't exist as a present facior, thus one has the idea 

that it doesn't exist. 
; Vasubandhu: But you are claiming that it is the same factor which 
is past, present, and future! Or if you say that there is a difference 
between the future sound and the present one, and that the judgment 
it doesn't exist" relates to the first, then this is tantamount to saying 
that the present one exists after not having existed. 

Vaibhasika: If the nonexistent could be an object of consciousness, 
how is it that the future Buddha in his last life said that it's impossible 
for him to perceive anything which doesn't exist? 

Vasubandhu: In the context, he was contrasting himself with other 
religious teachers who claim a nonexistent enlightenment for 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 557 


themselves. Besides, if everything that is thought is real, there is no 
place for any investigation into things, and the future Buddha of this 
passage is not different from the other religious teachers. Again, the 
Buddha speaks of knowing what exists as what exists, and what doesn't 
exist as what doesn't exist. 

Vaibhasika: But if past and future factors do not exist, past acts 
could have no effects. 

Vasubandhu: In a retributory process the effect of an act doesn't 
occur immediately after the act. It occurs through a special 
transformation in the series where the act, i.e., the volition, previously 
arose. If you assert that past and future factors exist, you are then 
forced to say that their effects always exist too; thus what effect can an 
action bring about? 

Vaibhasika: But if past and future factors don't exist, how can one 
be bound by a past or future defilement? 

Vasubandhu: One is bound to the past defilement because of the 
existence of its traces in the present; one is bound to a future 
defilement by the existence of a trace which helps give rise to a future 
defilement. 

32.(E828; T826) Delusion is the same as ignorance. The doubt 
intended in the passage of the Kosa is principally doubt as regards the 
four noble truths. 

34.(E829-830; T828) The fundamental causes of defilements are 
traces; objects are causes as sensory contents, and careless mental 
attention is cause as application. 

36.(E831; T830-831) Ignorance is the "root" of all the defilements 
and their traces; one can speak of it as a "contaminant" inasmuch as it 
is an evil influence. 

41.(E836; T835) The fetters are attraction, repugnance, pride, 
ignorance, views, adherence to views, rules, etc., perplexity, envy and 
selfishness. 

48a.(E844; T842) Anger and hypocrisy are added by the 
Vaibhasikas. 

52-54.(E846-848; T845-847) Lethargy, excitedness and sleepiness 
can be bad or neutral in the realm of desire. The rest of the envelopers 
are always bad, while the afflictions are neutral there. Deceit and 
craftiness occur in the material realm as well as the realm of desire. 
Except for pride and sleepiness, which are eliminated by practice, all 
the defilements are eliminated by correct view. 


558 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


55.(E848-849; T847-848) Attachment is associated with the 
faculties of satisfaction and contentedness, repugnance is associated 
with the faculties of frustration and depression, and ignorance may be 
associated with any feeling. False views are associated with 
frustrations concerning those of good actions and with satisfaction 
concerning those of bad actions. 

59bd.(E852; T851-852) The two pairs constitute obstructions to 
perceptual identification in the first case, to peace in the second. In any 
case, all the defilements count as obstructions. 

63.(E860; T859) "An antidote" such as the path of liberation: 
"acquisition of results", i.e., the result of stream-enterer, etc. 

64.(E861; T860) Ascertainments are of two kinds--those 
constituting knowledge and those constituting abandoning. There are 
nine of them: three for the realm of desire, three for the material 
realm, three for the two higher realms taken together, and the 
destruction of the proclivities in each of three realms. The six results 
of patience are the first six ascertainments. 


CHAPTER SIX 


1.(E871; T895) The path of meditation may be either mundane or 
supramundane; the path of vision is always supramundane. 

3.(E871-889; T899-910) As regards the four noble truths, which are 
the objects of the path of vision, how can it be said, for instance, that 
all conditioned factors liable to be connected with distress are 
frustrating only? For in fact they may be linked with satisfaction, etc. 

Vaibhasika: There are three states of frustration. The first is the 
state of frustration itself, the second is the state of frustration inherent 
in conditioned factors, and the third is the state of frustration inherent 
in transformation. Thus, even the conditioned factors associated with 
satisfaction are frustrating, because this satisfaction is transitory, and 
thus they are frustrating by the state of frustration inherent in 
transformation. 


Vasubandhu: But why aren't they perceived as frustrating in 
themselves? 

Vaibhasika: It's just like the case of an eyelash, which is not felt in 
the palm of the hand but which causes pain when it is put in the eye. 
In the same way, ignorant people do not see that conditioned factors 
associated with pleasure are really frustrating, but noble ones do. 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 559 


Vasubandu: But the path itself is conditioned. Thus it is frustrating, 
too. 

Vaibhasika: No, for the definition of "frustration" is that it be 
contrary, whereas this is not the case for the path. 

Vasubandhu: Why is only frustration spoken of as one of the truths, 
when there is also satisfaction? 

Vaibhasika: Because there is so much more frustration than 
satisfaction. In the same way one calls a pile of lentils with which 
there may be mixed some beans "a pile of lentils". 

Vasubandhu: But how can one regard as frustrating feelings which 
are experienced as satisfying? 

Vaibhasika: Because they are impermanent, and this impermanence 
leads to frustration. 

Vasubandhu: This is confusing two aspects in conditioned factors. 
Impermanence and frustration are not the same. 

Vaibhasika: But there is a siitra which says that all feelings are 
conjoined with frustration. And there is also an argument by 
reasoning: The causes of satisfaction may themselves give rise to 
frustration. Thus drink or food, when ingested excessively, do so. Since 
it is illogical that the same thing be the cause of two contrary results, 
one must conclude that even when the result is perceived as satisfying 
there is really some frustration there. What is sometimes perceived as 
satisfying may be only the remedy or the transformation of a 
frustration. For instance, someone carrying a heavy burden may put 
this burden on the other shoulder, and thus feel some pleasure, but 
really this is only a transformation of frustration. 

Vasubandhu: Satisfaction does exist in itself. If your criterion for 
frustration is that someone perceives it as such, in the same way our 
criterion for satisfaction is that someone perceives it as such. No 
sensation which is in itself desirable becomes in itself undesirable. If 
noble persons don't like satisfaction, it's not because of its nature itself, 
but because of its effect of making one lose good qualities. If 
satisfaction were undesirable in itself, who would ever be attached to 
it? As to the sutra cited, the Buddha clearly states there that he is 
speaking of the frustration coming from the transformation and 
impermanence of satisfaction, and not of the state of frustration itself. 
If all feelings were frustrating, they would never have been categorized 
as triple by the Buddha. You claim that all satisfaction is accompanied 
by some frustration, but this cannot empirically be seen to be the case. 


560 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


To say that satisfaction means only less frustration is also not possible, 
because the satisfaction felt in the first three meditational states would 
then be "less frustration", and then this satisfaction fades in the fourth 
meditational state. This would be then "more frustration"! As for your 
argument that the causes of satisfaction can be causes of frustration, 
it is inexactly put. For there are not any absolute causes of satisfaction 
and frustration. It depends on the state of the perceiver. But if the state 
of the perceiver is uniform, a cause of satisfaction is always a cause of 
satisfaction and never a cause of frustration. As for your argument 
about transferring a burden to another shoulder, this is really 
satisfaction, because relief, and cannot in any way be interpreted as a 
transformation of frustration. 

4.(E890; T910-911) Though four noble truths have been spoken of 
by the Buddha, he also speaks of the "two truths", the conventional and 
highest or ultimate truth. Conventional truths arise when things have 
not been completely analyzed, such as when one speaks of a pot as a 
pot, water as "water", etc. Ultimate truth is where one analyzes all the 
constituent parts of some "thing" to such an extent that the very notion 
of the "thing" disappears. The conventional is a kind of truth because 
a person is not lying when he calls a pot a pot, and as far as 
conventional designations are concerned, he is using them properly. 
But further analysis will show that no pot really exists as an entity. 

5.(E890-891; T912-913) There are three phases in the seeing of the 
four noble truths. First, one studies them from other sources, then 
contemplates what one has studied, and finally one engages in real 
meditation. This corresponds to the three kinds of insight: insight 
through study, insight through reflection, and insight through 
meditation. 

12.(E898-899; T921-922) In meditation on breathing one is 
conscious of how many inhalations and exhalations are made, how the 
air enters and leaves the lungs, how the air currents enter parts of the 
body; the breath is analyzed into material elements, etc. 

20-24.(E914-921; T935-942) The aids to penetration are heat, 
summit, patience and supreme factors. 

As a woman one may acquire the highest worldly factors and be 
reborn as a man; thus there is uncalculated cessation of femininity. 

The aids to penetration are lost at death by those other than noble 
ones; noble persons lose them when they quit this earth either at death 
or by moving to another realm. Specifics provided about their 


ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 561 


acquisition, loss or retention by nobles and by those who transmigrate. 

More details about the expectancies of a transmigrator, a self- 
enlightened one, a Bodhisattva. 

27.(E925-928; T947-949) Debate on the question of whether there 
can be full understanding, a notion which is rejected by Vasubandhu 
as being incompatible with the idea of progressive path of vision. 

34ab.(E940-944; T959-962) Objection: "One who has seven more 
lives to live" actually will be reborn twenty-eight more times--seven as 
a human, seven in the intermediate states, seven as gods and seven 
more in intermediate states 

Vaibhasika: But twenty-eight is four groups of seven, and there is no 
eighth type of rebirth in the same realm. 

Vasubandhu: Yes there is: the one who attains the summit of 
existence is reborn eight times in the same realm. 

Vaibhasika: The reference is only to rebirths in the realm of desire. 

One who becomes a stream-enterer as a human will be reborn 
among humans to attain liberation; one who attains it as a god will be 
liberated as a god. 

Why can't a stream-enterer backslide? Because he does not do 
things that would produce rebirth, since his good roots and purity 
preclude it. 

39.(E953-955; T970-971) Three kinds of nonreturners who go to 
the material realm are those who achieve liberation in the 
intermediate state, those who achieve liberation on rebirth, and those 
who "go higher." Each is of three sorts depending on how long it takes 
them to gain liberation. 

44.(E966-970; T981-982) All traces of defilements are finally 
removed with the diamond-like meditational concentration. This type 
of concentration may occur on the path of vision, in any of the 
meditational states, or in any of the immaterial meditation 
attainments. The diamond-like meditational concentration occurring 
at the last of the immaterial meditational attainments, i.e., the 
attainment of the cessation of awareness and feelings, results in the 
practitioner becoming an adept (asaiksa, literally "one who has 
nothing further to learn"), or noble person. According to the 
Vaibhasikas, but not according to the Sautrantikas, one may backslide 
from the state of being a noble person. 

58-60b.(E996-1006, T1006-1012) Why one can't backslide from the 
perfected state explained, citing scripture and giving arguments. 


562 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


There are three kinds of backsliding: from what is attained, from 
what is not yet attained, and from experiencing. The Buddha 
experiences only the first; the immovable perfected ones only the first 
two; perfected beings experience all three. But one who has fallen 
away cannot die, and does not misbehave. 

63-64.(E1007-1011; T1016-1019) Seven kinds of noble persons: 
(1) faith-followers, (2) factor-followers, (3) resolved in faith, (4) of 
attained views, (5) eye-witnesses, (6) liberated by wisdom, (7) 
liberated both ways. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


1.(E1033-1035; T1087-1088) The patiences are not knowledge 
because at the moment of their existence doubts still exist. But it is the 
very patiences themselves which make the doubts cease. 

11.(E1054-1055; T1107) When one knows the awareness of 
another one does not know it as the other knows it; one isn't aware of 
its content, but only knows that the other's awareness is contaminated. 
One knows, that is, the specific characteristic of its content but not its 
general properties; one knows mental but not material factors; one 
knows present factors but not past or future ones. One knows these in 
meditation, not by ordinary vision. 

12.(E1055-1057; T1108-1109) (Cf. also VI, 67) Enlightenment is 
knowledge of the cessation of factors as well as the non-(further)- 
arising of factors. When one knows "Frustration is fully known by me, 
the origin of frustration has been abandoned by me, the cessation of 
frustration has been realized by me, the path has been cultivated by 
me", this is knowledge of cessation. When one knows "Frustration is 
fully known by me and doesn't have to be known by me again", etc., 
"the path has been cultivated by me and doesn't have to be cultivated 
again", this is the knowledge of non-(further)arising (VII, 7). These 
knowledges may be regarded as both ultimate and conventional, 
because the subsequent judgments relating to "me" can be only 
conventional. 

13.(E1057-1062; T1110-1117) The knowledges on the path of 
vision have the following aspects as objects: for the truth of frustration 
impermanence, frustration, emptiness, and absence of self; for the 
truth of the origination of frustration, causes as past seed, originating 
(proximate) cause, successive causes as forming a series, conditions as 





ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 563 


the collection of co-factors; for the truth of the cessation of frustration, 
cessation of defiled aggregates, calm because of the annihilation of 
greed, hostility, and confusion, exalted because free of all trouble, and 
related to liberation; for the truth of the path, the path itself, logic (for 
the path is based on logical means and in itself contains means), mode 
of progress, and leading to liberation. These aspects constitute 
wisdom. They relate to both subject and object. Awarenesses and 
accompanying mental factors are subject and object; all other factors, 
whether conditioned or unconditioned, are only objects. 

28.(E1083-1085; T1136-1137) The powers of a Buddha include 
special knowledges. These are: the power of knowing what is possible 
and what impossible, the power of knowing the retributions for acts, 
the power of meditations, deliverances, concentrations and special 
attainments, the power of knowing others’ faculties, the power of 
knowing others' various dispositions, the force of knowing paths that 
go everywhere (into all the life-destinies), the power of the knowledge 
of former lives and their loci, the power of knowing the death and 
rebirth of beings, the power of knowing how to destroy all distress. 

32.(E1090-1093; T1141-1143) The special grounds of the 
confidence of a Buddha rest on these knowledges. The three special 
establishments of mindfulness of a Buddha are his indifference to 
whether his hearers accept, don't accept, or partially do and partially 
don't accept his teachings. 

33.(E1093-1095; T1143-1144) The Buddha's great compassion is 
impartial, extends to all sentient beings, is produced after great 
preparation, is grounded in the noble truths, has not the slightest 
admixture of hostility. 

43.(E1109-1110; T1159-1160) The four higher faculties that are 
conventional awarenesses are divine eye, divine ear, memory of past 
lives and knowledge of supernatural powers. 

Why don't the "five" (excluding knowledge of destruction of 
proclivities) exist in the immaterial realm? The first three have 
material things as contents, knowledge of others’ minds involves 
material colors and shape, and the memory of past lives pertains to the 
realm of desire. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 


1.(E1126-1128; T1216-1218) The Sautrantika objects that if 


564 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


meditational concentration is to be defined as "one-pointed awareness" 
then it is awareness itself, and not a special kind of entity as the 
Vaibhasikas claim. 

Vaibhasika: No, meditationa! concentration is a special kind of 
factor by which awarenesse becom oncentrated. The concentrated 
awarenesses themselves are not meditational concentration. 

Vasubandhu: Since awarenesses are momentary, all of them, 
whether meditationally concentrated or not, have only one object. You 
may say that meditational concentration makes it so that the second 
awareness is not distracted from the object of the first awareness. But 
in that case, meditational concentration is doing nothing as far as the 
first awareness is concerned, and yet you consider the first awareness 
to be associated with meditational concentration. Also, you have 
defined meditational concentration as a generally permeating factor 
(cf. Ul, 24), a factor occurring with every awareness. Thus all 
awarenesses must be meditationally concentrated. 

Vaibhasika: No, because in nonmeditational states the meditational 
concentration occurring with an awareness is not very strong. 

Vasubandhu: For the Sautrantika, meditational concentration is the 
meditationally concentrated awarenesses themselves and nothing else. 

2.(E1130-1131; T1219-1220) In the second meditational stage 
there is no more thought; the third meditational state has no more joy; 
and the fourth finally discards satisfaction for a pure equanimity. 

3.(E1131; T1220) Some schools say there is some matter in the 
immaterial attainments; they are called "immaterial" because they are 
less material than other factors. Vasubandhu rejects this claim, arguing 
that it contradicts various theses propounded elsewhere, is illogical, 
and that alleged textual authority for it is based on misunderstandings. 

9.(E1143-1147; 71231-1236) Vaibhasika: The satisfaction existing 
in the meditational states is not bodily pleasure but a mental state 
arising from tranquillity. 

Darstantika objection: The satisfaction of the meditational states is 
bodily, for all satisfaction has a bodily aspect. The idea that 
"satisfaction" stands for an aspect of tranquillity is untenable, for in 
that case, since tranquillity increases, satisfaction should increase too. 
The Vaibhasika also wishes to subsume all "joy" under the faculty of 
satisfaction. 

We, however, maintain that there is joy which is not simply 
satisfaction. 




















ABHIDHARMAKOSABHASYA 565 


24.(E1163; T1256) Three special meditational attainments may be 
naimed the meditational concentration on emptiness, on the signless, 
and on the wishless. 

25cd.(E1165; T1259) There are futher succeeding meditational 
concentrations which focus on the emptiness of emptiness, the 
signlessness of the signless, and the wishlessness of the wishiess. 

29.(£1170; T1264) From meditational concentration arise the four 
boundless states: loving kindness, compassion, sympathy and 
equanimity. They are called "boundless" because they can be applied 
to innumerable sentient beings, their merit is boundless. 


175. VASUBANDHU, Pratityasamutpadavyakhya on 
Pratityasamutpadavibhanganirdesa 


The work is available in Tibetan, and a small portion of it exists in 
Sanskrit.“ This portion has been edited by Giuseppe Tucci,*”° 
comprising sections of the discussions of ignorance, feeling, thirst, 
grasping and existence among the twelve components of the Buddhist 
chain. Two sections--on samskara and on vijfiana--have been edited 
and translated in Muroji (see note 524), who also provides a helpful 
brief summary of the entire work in French and a summary of the two 
sections he deals with. 


176. VASUBANDHU, Aparamitayuhsiitropadesa” 
Summary by K. Timura 


"This work consists of two parts, viz., the verse and the prose... The 
verse part contains twenty-four verses, each of which has four lines. In 
this part Vasubandhu expresses at first his undivided devotion to 
Amitabha...The next twenty-one verses describe the adornment of the 
Pure Land. In the last verse Vasubandhu confesses his aspiration to be 
born in the Pure Land with others. 

"In the prose part, Vasubandhu interprets the verses and explains 
the ‘Five spiritual Gates’, viz., the Gate of Worship, the Gate of Praise, 
the Gate of Aspiration, the Gate of Perception and the Gate of Merit 
Transference. The Gate of Worship means bodily action and the Gate 
of Praise moral action. The Gate of Aspiration is solely and exclusively 


566 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the aspiration to be born in the Pure Land. The Gate of Perception 
which is taught in detail will be explained below. The last, the Gate of 
Merit Transference, is the accomplishment of the compassionate heart 
in transferring merit to all beings in suffering. 

"In the Gate of Perception, the three kinds of adornments, may be 
perceived. These are the 17 kinds of adornments of the Buddha Land, 
the 8 kinds of adornments of Amitabha and the 4 kinds of adornments 
of the bodhisattvas in the Pure Land. Thus, the three kinds of 
adornment are further divided into twenty-nine. But all these can be 
condensed into one word, i.e., dharma, which means 'purity'. By the 
word "purity" is meant the true wisdom and non-created dharmakaya." 

"This is the most important doctrine of the Pure Land. All 
adornments of the Pure Land are condensed into one dharma, namely, 
tathata..." 


177. VASUBANDHU, Buddhanusmrtitika®”’ 
178. VASUBANDHU, Bhadracaryapranidhanatika®* 
179. VASUBANDHU, Commentary on a Caturdharmakasiitra’” 
180. VASUBANDHU, Vyakhyana on the Sanmukhi®*° 
Summary by Stefan Anacker 


This is a commentary on work number 56 above. The material is 
considered under six headings: (1) the realization of insight (prajfia), 
(2) the purification coming from the force of compassion, (3) the 
hindrances to "one's own" series (samtana), (4) knowing well the 
hindrances of others, (5) the accumulation of all that is necessary for 
enlightenment, (6) its result: correct knowledge and tathata. 

Other topics treated here are (1) supporting all sentient beings in 
times of suffering and of pleasure, (2) removal of the obstructions of 
"oneself" and "others", (3) acquiring of merit, (4-5) accomplishing both 
“one's own" and "others" aims, (6) the efforts needed so that others 
may achieve their aims. 

But this is all done in six brief headings only. The first and second 
have been taught in view of maturing sentient beings, by not 
abandoning them in either suffering or pleasurable states. The fifth has 


Sold telltoeemeeerens cme emeememiehmenetineeen 7 hone eee ements oneal 


SANMUKHIVYAKHYANA 567 


to do with maturing them in all that is necessary enlightenment. The 
third and the fourth have to do with removing obstructions "to 
oneself". The sixth has to do with the enlightenment body, and its 
extraordinary result, that one can stay in samsara without any limits 
and stand by to accomplish others' aims. 

In the first part, we can see four aspec.s: the knowledge of the 
selflessness of factors, lack of agitation at sentient beings with 
perverted views or at the sufferings of samsara, and recognizing the 
defilements of sentient beings. This work also succinctly deals with the 
perfections. It is through these kinds of vows and contemplations 
which are included in this work that knowledge and all the other 
Buddha's factors can be obtained, because they are the cause of them. 
Practice and knowledge of the Mahayana is by necessity neither in 
samsara nor in nirvana. The reason for wanting to obtain this practice 
and knowledge is explained in part 2. 

Thus we see that six efforts are being described here, which are 
taken up for the nonabandonment of sentient beings. 


181. VASUBANDHU, Dasabhiimikastitravyakhya* 
182. VASUBANDHU, Dharmacakrapravartanasiitra®** 
183. VASUBANDHU, Gathasamgrahasastrartha** 
184. VASUBANDHU, Gayasirsastitrasastrartha*™ 
185. VASUBANDHU, Mahayanasatadharmaprakagamukhasastra>*® 
186. VASUBANDHU, Nirvanastitraptirvabhiitotpannabhitasastra*° 
187. VASUBANDHU, Commentary on a Prajfiaparamitastitra**” 
188. VASUBANDHU, Commentary on Ratnactidamanistitra*** 


189. VASUBANDHU, Commentary on the 
Srimalasimhanadasttra®? 


190. VASUBANDHU, Saddharmapundarikopadesa**° 


568 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
191. VASUBANDHU, Sukhavativyiihopadesa™ 
Summary by Minoru Kiyota 


Minoru Kiyota has translated this text: this summary is taken from 
his article,*“? which also contains a translation ("T"). 

"The UpadeSa is one of the important Pure Land texts in the Sino- 
Japanese pure Land tradition. It neatly organizes ideas which are 
described in a less structured manner in the 29.Larger Sukhavati- 
vytiha-sitra." 

"The Upadesa consists of two parts, the verses and the prose. The 
former summarizes the central theme of the text; the latter analyzes 
and interprets that theme...(T)his paper establishes ten arbitrary topic 
headings. Each topic is an elaboration of the preceding one." 

"1.(T278) Vow...After years of spiritual practice, accumulating 
insight at each stage of practice, Bodhisattva Dharmakara...finally 
becomes Buddha Amitayus. At each stage he makes a vow. The 
eighteenth stipulates as follows: 'Even when I am able to attain 
Buddhahood, if sentient beings of the ten quarters, with sincerity and 
faith, desire to be born in my land by practising up to ten thoughts 
(..e., chanting the name of Buddha Amitayus) and are not born there, 
I will not accept supreme enlightenment." 

"2.(T278-279) Faith. Birth in Pure Land is realized through faith. 
This section describes that faith in terms of the five items of 
mindfulness (anusmrti). They are: 1. Worship. 2. Praise. 3. Vow. 4. 
Meditation. 5. Transferring Merits...Worship and praise (which the 
Upadesa identifies with samatha, i.e., mental calm) parallel the 
practices of body and speech, respectively; vow and meditation (which 
the Upadesa identifies as vipagyand, i.e., insight derived from 
Samatha) parallel the practice of mind-perfection. The four...are 
prerequisites to the final practice, the transferring of merits." 

3.(T279-285) "Objects of Faith...They are described in terms of 
twenty-nine merits: seventeen merits of Buddha-land, eight merits of 
Buddha Amitayus, and four merits of the bodhisattvas." 

4.(T285-286) "One Dharma. One Dharma means Pure Land: One 
means universal. Dharma refers to the twenty-nine merits and hence 
embraces dharmakaya (Pure Land), sambhogakaya (Buddha 
Amitayus), and nirmanakaya (the bodhisattvas)...One-Dharma 
faith...enables all beings of the world to be transformed into the beings 


Sg tt ean 


_— 


eS 


SUKHAVATIVYUHOPADESA 569 


of Pure Land, the representation of the unconditioned realm 
(asamskrta-dharma-kaya). Transformation, however, requires skillful 
means." 

5.(T286-287) "Skillful means...The practices of Dharmakara 
represent the Sukhavati-vyitha-sitra's version of transforming prajfia 
(perfect wisdom) to jfadna (nondiscriminative wisdom)...th(is) 
transformation is described as skillful means....prajfid is insight into 
One Dharma, the 'short' (twenty-nine merits distilled into an essence) 
version; jriana is insight into the ways and means to deal with the 
world of sentient beings, the ‘long' (the distilled expanded into twenty- 
nine merits) version. Hence, prajfia and jfidna are not two distinct 
entities, nor is Pure Land a distinct realm existing outside the world of 
sentient beings.” 

6.(T287) "The Three Teachings to Eliminate the Three Errors. 
Improvising skillful means--the transferring of merits--is a means of 
eliminating obstacles which hinder the realization of 
enlightenment...The rationale underlying this theory is that action 
(karma) produces latent or habit seeds (avijfiapti-bija) and habit seeds 
in turn shape future action. The unwholesome habits are greed, 
idleness, and self-conceit. They are referred to as the three errors..." 

7.(T287-288) "Three Pure States of Mind. The bodhisattvas who 
have eliminated the three errors realize the three pure states of mind. 
They are: 1. Pure mind which seeks the undefiled (i.e., the absence of 
greed), 2. Pure mind which brings peace to all beings, 3. Pure mind 
which enables universal salvation..." 

8..(T288) "The Conventional and the Supreme...The understanding 
of conventional truth needs insight into supreme truth in order to deal 
effectively and unpervertedly with the problems of sentient 
beings...Skillful means, the external expression of compassion, is 
dependent on the feedback between the conventional and the 
supreme." 

9.(T288-289) "Perfection of All Things Vowed. The vow of 
Bodhisattva Dharmakara is to save all beings, a matter that is realized 
by the Pure Land practitioner by observing the five items of 
mindfulness. A reexamination of the five items now follows..." 

10.(T289-290) "The Practices to Benefit Others. Practices here...are 
the products of the practices of the five items of mindfulness. The five 
are: 1.Nearing Pure Land by worshipping Amitayus (product of 
worship), 2.Joining the congregation which praises Amitayus (product 


570 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF [NDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of praise), 3.Entering Amitayus' domain by vowing to be born in his 
Pure Land (product of vow), 4.Entering his palace (product of 
meditation), 5.Entering the garden of samsara and enjoying the work 
of enlightening others (product of transferring merits).” 


192. VASUBANDHU, Commentary on Asanga's 
Vajracchedikabhasya’** 


193. VASUBANDHU, Visesacintibrahmapariprechasastra*™ 


194. VASUBANDHU, Vyakhyayukti or 
Stitravyakhyayuktyupadesa°* 


195. VASUBANDHU, Vadavidhi 


The Vadavidhi does not survive as an integral textin any language, 
but it has been frequently quoted in Dignaga's Pramanasamuccayatika. 
All available fragments of the Vadavidhi quoted in those texts have 
been arranged in the edition of Erich Frauwallner.*° "T" references 
here are to the translation by Stefan Anacker.°” 


Summary by Stefan Anacker 


This is the only work on logic by Vasubandhu which has to any 
extent survived. It is apparently the earliest of the logical treatises 
Vasubandhu wrote. It contains one of the earliest definitions of 
pervasion (vyapti) as "invariable concomitance" (avinabhava), reduces 
the earlier five-membered inference schema to one with three 
members, insists on the statement of invariable concomitance being 
included in the inference-schema, and reduces the twenty-four kinds 
of futile rejoinder of Nydyastitra V.1.1 ff. to three kinds of flaws. Many 
innovations previously ascribed to Dignaga can thus be found in this 
text, and the treatise may in fact be regarded as marking the dawn of 
Indian formal logic. 

The stock example of an inference-schema most discussed here is 
the following: 

Hypothesis: Sounds of speech are not eternal. 


Reason: Because of their state of arising immediately upon 
an effort. 


a a 


VADAVIDHI 571 


Statement of Invariable Concomitance: For whatever is in 
a state of arising immediately upon an effort does not have eternality. 
Example: Just as a pot and unlike space. 


1.°8(T38) The paksa (p) is defined as the object (artha) one wishes 
to investigate. 

2-3.(138) The characteristic of a hypothesis is the statement of a 
sadhya (s), i.e., something one wishes to demonstrate. A factor- 
possessor (dharmin) must be shown to have demonstrability through 
a factor (dharma) which is directly manifest. 

4.(E38-39) The reason is the indication of the invariable 
concomitance of the s with the hetu (h). There is really no reason 
unless there is an indication of an invariable concomitance. 

5.(T39) The example (i.e., the third member or drstanta) should 
include not only parallel cases (pot, space), but also a statement of 
invariable concomitance. 

6-7.(T39) There are three general types of fallacious reasons 
(hetvabhasa): (1) an h which is not demonstrated; (2) an h which is 
not sufficiently certain; and (3) an h which is self-contradictory. 
Examples are: (1) "Sounds of speech are eternal, because they are 
perceived by the eye, (2) "Sounds of speech are eternal, because they 
are without a body", (3) A Vaisesika says "Sounds of speech are not 
eternal, because they are perceived through the senses"; a Samkhya 
says "The effect is contained in the cause, because it comes to be 
through the cause" (i.e., inconsistency with one's own unstated theses 
is not an extralogical ground for rejecting an argument in 
Vasubandhu's method). 

8.(T39-40) If the example is undemonstrated, it counts as type (1) 
also. Example: "Sounds of speech are eternal, because of their 
nontangibility, like a cognition, not like a pot.” 

9.(E40) Perception is consciousness which arises only on account of 
the (sense-) content after which it is designated. Examples: 
Awarenesses of visibles, awarenesses of pleasure. This definition 
excludes false awarenesses such as the awareness of shell as silver, 
because this awareness is designated as a "silver-cognition", but does 
not arise because of silver but because of shell. This definition also 
excludes conventional awarenesses like an awareness of a pot. Pots 
themselves cannot give rise to an awareness, because of their 
conventionality and their thus not being causal. "Pots" are only 


572 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


juxtapositions of visibles, etc., which are interpreted as pots. 
(According to the provisional theory of Vasubandhu, what are 
normally perceived as entities are in no way really entities: "pot" is a 
mere conventional expression for a dependent complex with no 
unifying entity involved.) Inferential awareness is also excluded from 
perception by this definition, because such an awareness arises, for 
instance, through the awareness of smoke and the memory of its 
invariable concomitance with fire, and not through the fire itself. That 
through which exclusively the awareness arises, and does not exist 
unless it arises, is called a "content" in this passage. 

10.(T40) "Invariable concomitance" means that one object cannot 
exist unless the other one does. Example: smoke is invariably 
concomitant with fire. Inferential knowledge can be described as an 
observation of the h (here, litga) and the memory of its invariable 
concomitance with that which is to be inferred. The h itself must be 
directly known: otherwise, there is no inference. 

11.(T41) Definition of the three types of fallacious reasons given in 
6-7. They may be termed (1) unreal (asamyak), (2) undermined 
(viparita) and (3) contradictory (savirodha). "Unreal" or "incorrect" is 
where the object does not exist in the manner the hypothesis states it 
does. "Undermined" is where the argument is formulated without a 
true reason. "Contradictory" is where the reason cannot coexist with 
the hypothesis. 

12-13.(T41) The types of fallacies in arguments which are 
enumerated in Nydyasiitra V.1.1 ff. can all be reduced to one or 
another of the three types. 

14.(T41-43) Reduction of the Nyayasiitra's (V.1.3-4) futile rejoinder 
"proceeding from extension and reduction" (utkarsapakarsasama) to 
an undermined argument. 

Example: if the reason demonstrates that the s is associated with a 
certain factor, then it is not different from the s, like the water of a 
stream which has entered the ocean. But if the s is already obtained, 
what purpose can the reason have? 

Reply: A reason is a causal factor for an awareness, not a material 
cause, 

16.(T43-44) Reduction of the Nyayasiitra's (V.1.27) futile rejoinder 
"based on direct apprehension" (upalabdhisama) to an "undermined" 
type. 

Example: "The argument for sounds of speechs' noneternality 


VADAVIDHI 573 


through their state-of-arising-inimediately-upon-an-effortis not valid, 
because in the case of a flash of lightning, noneternality is 
demonstrated by direct perception, but there is no state-of-arising- 
immediately-upon-an-effort involved. 

Reply: We are not claiming that something can be noneternal 
because of a state-of-arising-immediately-upon-an-effort only. 

17.(E44-45) Reduction of the futile rejoinder "based on 
nonutterance" (anuktisama)! to the undermined type. 

Example: "Since the reason does not exist prior to its apprehension 
and utterance, it follows that the s also does not exist. Thus, since 
sounds of speech are said to be noneternal because they have arisen 
due to an effort, it follows that, because the reason does not exist prior 
to its utterance, the sound is not yet noneternal. Thus it must be 
eternal prior to the utterance of the reason. But once it is eternal, how 
can it become noneternal?"” 

Reply: A reason brings about the arising of an awareness, not a 
cessation. This pseudo-argument however attempts to uphold that a 
reason brings about a cessation. Thus it is undermined. 

18.(T45) Reduction of the Nyayasiitra's (V.1.37) futile rejoinder 
"based on a difference in effect" (karyasama) to the "undermined" type. 

Example: "A pot is noneternal because of being an effect of a 
different sort, so how does it apply to sounds of speech?" 

Reply: Every effect is noneternal, so the pot's being a different sort 
of effect is irrelevant. 

19.(T45) The unreal fallacious reason includes futile rejoinders 
based on unwarranted overextension of principles 
(atiprasangasama) (cf. Nyayasiitra V.1.9-10) and on mere presumption 
(cf. Nydyasittra V.1.21). 

20.(T435) Example of a futile rejoinder based on overextension of 
principle: "What is your justification for saying that the pot itself is 
noneternal?" Reply: It can be directly perceived that the arising of a pot 
occurs. Thus this argument is wrong. 

21.(T46) Example of a futile rejoinder based on mere presumption: 
In reply to the argument that a self does not exist, because it cannot be 
apprehended, just like the son of a barren woman, this type of futile 


1.Not found in the Nydyasiitra but similar to is anutpattisama (NS 
V.1.12); see also section 23 of the present text, below. 


574 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


rejoinder might arise as follows: "Then it becomes self-evident that 
everything which is directly perceived must exist. But there are objects 
which, though directly perceived, do not exist, such as the wheel of 
fire". 

Reply: We are not assuming that there is existence for everything 
which can be directly perceived. But that which is not directly 
perceived, and cannot be inferred, does not exist. 

22.(T46) The "contradictory" includes futile rejoinders based on 
nonarising (anutpattisama)(cf. Nydyasiitra V.1.12), on eternality 
(nityasama) (cf. Nyayasiitra V.1.32), ete. 

23.(T46-47) Example of a futile rejoinder based on nonarising: "If 
sounds of speech are noneternal, because they have arisen due to an 
effort, then prior to its arising it has not arisen due to an effort, and 
hence is eternal." 

Reply: Before its arising the sound does not exist. To maintain that 
it does not exist and is eternal is a contradiction. For the adversary is 
saying "Since before the arising of the sound its state-of-arising- 
immediately-upon-an-effort does not exist, it follows that it has not 
arisen due to an effort, and thus is eternal, because of its state-of-not- 
arising-immediately-upon-an-effort". But there is no certainty that 
something is eternal because of its state-of -not-arising-immediately- 
upon-an-effort. Because some things are eternal, like space, some are 
noneternal, such as flashes of lightning, and others don't exist, such as 
a sky-flower. 

24.(T47) Example of a futile rejoinder based on eternality: "Sounds 
of speech are eternal, because they are eternally connected with 
noneternality, and its unchanging nature is thus eternal." 


Reply: This is a contradiction, because something noneternal is 
being called "eternal". 


196. VASUBANDHU, Paric askandhaprakarana 


The Sanskrit text does not survive. There are various editions, 


reconstructions and translations; cf. Potter, Bibliography. Third 
Edition, op. cit., p. 174. 


Summary by Stefan Anacker 


PANCASKANDHAKA 575 


The work seems on the surface to be another one of the many 
definitional treatises which have been written in Abhidharma since its 
inception. But it is at the same time a critique of a particular 
Abhidharma system. It has been called "a free reworking of Asanga's 
Abhidharmasamuccaya", and this seems to be the case, as the 
Abhidharma entity-list is identical to that of that work, and many of 
the definitions, though much more concise than those of Asaiiga, are 
essentially identical. The treatise, though mainly an Abhidharma work, 
was written when Vasubandhu was a Mahayanist, as the Yogacara 
store-consciousness is introduced. 

The Abhidharma list of factors defined and criticized here seems 
most akin to that of the Mahisasikas, as it supposes a great number of 
unconditioned factors. It is true that the Parficaskandhaka discusses 
only four of these, whereas the original Mahisasika list seems to have 
had nine.*”” 

The topic is the five aggregates which make up a "person". 


(1) Matter consists of the four great elements and everything which 
is derived from them. The elements are enumerated and defined as in 
Abhidharmakosa I, 12. What is derived from them are the sense-organs 
of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, tactile body, and visibles, sounds, smells, 
tastes, tactile sensations, and unmanifest karma (see Abhidharmakosa 
I, 11; IV, 3-4). The definition of unmanifest karma has been changed 
from that of the KosaI, 11.1 The new definition: Unmanifest karma is 
karma which has arisen from manifest action or meditational 
concentration: it is invisible and exercises no resistance. 

(2) Feelings, defined as of three kinds: satisfying, frustrating, and 
that which is neither. "Satisfying" is defined as whatever there arises 
a desire to be connected with again, once it has stopped; "frustrating" 
as whatever there arises a desire to be separated from, once it has 
arisen. : 

(3) Identification, defined as the grasping of signs in a sense-object. 

(4) Conditioning factors. The following list is presented: : 

Those occurring in every awareness (i.e., pervasive): 
contact, attention and thinking. 


1.Perhaps as a result of Saighabhadra's criticisms of the KoSa's 
definition in his Abhidharmasamayapradipika. 


576 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Those occurring only with certain contents: interest, resolve, 
mindfulness, concentration and wisdcm. 

Good: faith, shame, modesty, absence of greed, lack of 
hostility, lack of hatred, energy, tranquillity, heedfulness, equanimity, 
kindness. 

Defilements: attachment, repugnance, pride, ignorance, 
views and perplexity. 

Afflictions: anger, vengefulness, hypocrisy, spite, envy, 
selfishness, deceit, craftiness, arrogance, violence, shamelessness, 
disregard, lethargy, excitedness, lack of confidence, sloth, 
heedlessness, forgetfulness, distraction, noncomprehension. 

Either afflicting or good: regret, sleepiness, initial thought, 
sustained thought. 

Most interesting among the definitions of these terms are that of 
"hypocrisy" as "unwillingness to recognize one's own faults"; of "initial 
thought" as "a discourse of inquiry by the mind, a certain kind of 
volition and discernment, which can be characterized as an indistinct 
state of awareness"; of "sustained thought" as "a discourse of 
examination by the mind, which can be characterized as a distinct 
state of awareness". 

Dissociated conditioning factors: Though Vasubandhu gives the list 
of these "factors", he considers them pure designations (prajfiapti) for 
situations in matter, awarenesses, and accompanying mental factors. 
They are thus rejected as true entities. They are enumerated as 
possession (see Abhidharmakosa II, 23, 25-26), described by 
Vasubandhu as being a mere designation for "seeds" (bija--see 
explanation at 197.Karmasiddhiprakarana 20), capacities, 
approachments or adjustments; nonidentifying awareness, described 
by Vasubandhu as a cessation of awarenesses and associated factors 
coming about through attention dispensing with cognitions about to 
arise, where former cognitions do not exist; the attainment of the 
cessation trance, a similar situation in awareness coming after the 
other immaterial attainments have been practised; a nonidentifying 
kind of awareness similarly described as the cessation of awarenesses 
and accompanying factors; life-force, described by Vasubandhu as 
being any continuity of conditioning factors projected by past action 
within events taking part in an organism; homogeneity-force, defined 
as interdependence of bodily parts; birth, defined as any arising of a 
stream of conditioning factors which has not already arisen, as regards 


PANCASKANDHAKA 577 


any collection of factors taking part in an organism; old age, duration 
and extinction, all similarly defined as changes in streams of factors 
occurring "in" an organism; the collection of words, defined as the 
expressions for the essential natures of factors; the collection of 
phrases, defined as expressions for the particularities of factors; the 
collection of syllables, defined as the actual sounds through which the 
other two are disclosed; and ordinariness, defined as the 
nonattainment of good factors. 

(5)°°° Consciousness, defined as the manifestation of a supporting 
object. But not only are the usual six types of perception (visual, 
audial, olfactory, gustatory, tactual and mental) enumerated, but also 
the store-consciousness and ego-consciousness (manas, here used in 
Asanga's new sense of the term). Vasubandhu admits that the store- 
consciousness’ objects are undiscerned, but within his definition of it 
gives reasons for assuming its existence: it joins an assemblage 
pertaining to an organism into a felt relationship, and continues as a 
series of factors; it is the consciousness which exists in the attainment 
of cessation of feelings and perceptions; it is the state of evolvement 
into another aspect once there has been a perception dependent upon 
any supporting object; it is the state of awareness’ arising again even 
after the stream of awarenesses has been severed; it is entry into 
transmigration. The ego-consciousness is defined as being merely one 
of the contents of the store-consciousness, which content gives rise to 
the sense of self. It is eliminated in the Buddhist path. Vasubandhu 
asks why the "aggregates" are designated in this way. He says that it is 
through their collectivity, i.e., various kinds of matter, etc. being 
heaped up together, that "time", "series", "aspects", "developments" and 
"sense-objects" seem to occur. 

In the discussion of the senses which follows, the most important 
innovation of Vasubandhu is in the discussion of the unconditioned 
factors, which are considered by the Mahigasikas (?) as being part of 
the sense-field of mentally cognizables. The list of these unconditioned 
factors is: space, uncalculated cessation, calculated cessation, and 
suchness. Vasubandhu eliminates these as special kinds of "factors": 
space is only any interval separating materialities; uncalculated 
cessation is a nonseparation of the cessation of mental factors without 
antidotes to defilements entering in; calculated cessation is a similar 
nonseparation of cessation of mental factors where antidotes to 
defilements are operative; and suchness is the inherent nature of all 


578 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


factors, the selflessness of events. (In other words, the only inherent 
nature in all factors is that they have none!) 

Interesting in the light of Dignaga's and post-Dignagan discussions 
of discriminative and nondiscriminative judgments is Vasubandhu's 
statement that all of the sensory domains of the sensory consciousness, 
mental consciousness, and mentally. cognizables involves conceptual 
constructions (savikalpaka). 


197. VASUBANDHU, Karmasiddhiprakarana 


The Sanskrit text does not survive, but early translations into 
Chinese and Tibetan do; thus all editions are editions of translations. 
The work has been edited and translated into French from Tibetan 
(Tohoku 113) by Etienne Lamotte, and thence into English by Leo M. 
Pruden.®*! It is also translated by Stefan Anacker,°** which is our "T". 


Summary by Stefan Anacker 


This work attempts to explain karmic retribution, psychic 
continuity, etc. by introducing the Yogacara concept of "storehouse 
consciousness" (Glayavijfidna). Like the AbhidharmakosSa, it directs 
itself also against many Vaibhasika and Vatsiputriya/Sammitiya 
theories.** 


1-2.(T93-94) Statement of the Vaibhasika definition of the three 
kinds of acts (bodily, verbal, and mental): Acts committed by the body 
are bodily acts, speech itself is verbal action, and these two kinds of 
acts together constitute manifest and unmanifest karma (see 
AbhidharmakoSa 1, 10-11; IV, 1-3). "Manifest bodily karma" is defined 
by the Vaibhasika as a shape (see KoSa 1, 10; IV, 2-3) which has arisen 
from an awareness which has a content referring to it (the shape). It 
is assumed by the Vaibhasika to belong to the sense-field of material 
factors. 

3.(T94-95) Vasubandhu: Is shape a special kind of atom (see Kosa 
II, 22), some special aggregation of atoms, or some single entity 
pervading the aggregations of color-atoms? If it is a special kind of 
atom, "long", "short", etc., it would have to be comprised separately in 
each part of the aggregate to which it belongs, just as color is. If itis a 


KARMASIDDHIPRAKARANA 579 


special aggregation of atoms, why can't it be just a special aggregation 
of color-atoms? If it is a single entity, it would have to be perceived 
separately in each part of the aggregation, because it would have to be 
in all of the parts at one time. Otherwise, if it had parts, it could not be 
a single entity. This last view is also invalid because the Vaibhasika 
must hold the sense-fields to be aggregations of atoms, and because it 
is identical to the Vaisesika doctrine of wholes. 

4.(T95) "Shape" is really only color. When color appears in one 
direction in great quantity, it's called "long"; in small quantity, "short"; 
equal in each of four sides, "square"; if there is an equal distance 
everywhere from the center to the circumference, "circular"; if there is 
a greater quantity of color at its central portion, "convex", a smaller 
quantity, "concave"; going along in one direction, "even", going in 
various directions, "uneven". If shape were a separate kind of entity, 
which the Vaibhasikas claim, various shapes couldn't be situated 
within one locus, just as various colors can't. (Cf. Kosa IV, 2-3). 

5.(T95-96) Vaibhasika: How can one discern something's shape at 
a long distance, then, and not discern its color? (Cf. Kosa IV, 3) 

Vasubandhu: How can one discern the shape of a group before one 
discerns the shapes of its members? Actually, when something's color 
isn't clearly discerned, its shape isn't either. (Cf. KoSa IV, 3) 

6.(T96) Sammitiya:” Manifest karma is a movement which has 
arisen from an awareness which: has its object as content. 

7-8.(T96-99) Vasubandhu proceeds to show that the concept of 
movement, or the progression of the same thing to another locus, 
cannot be demonstrated. The argument is identical to that of Kosa IV, 
2: the nonperception of subtle differences between the thing at locus 
A and the "same thing" at locus B does not mean that there are no 
differences, causes of destruction for the thing at locus A not being 
necessary because of the inherent momentariness of everything. This 


1.Vasubandhu had already criticized this theory in Abhidharmakosa 
III, 100. 


2.The identification of opponents are taken from Sumatisila's 
commentary. Only the "Sauryodayika" of 11-13 is mentioned by 
Vasubandhu. The "Theravadin" of 35 ("the Tamraparniyas") are 
however given by Vasubandhu himself. 


580 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


constitutes a refutation of the Sammitiya theory of combustion. Some 
new examples are adduced: though no special characteristics can be 
ascertained for different flames burning tall grass, this doesn't mean 
that they aren't all different. Assuming the necessity of a cause of 
destruction leads to an infinite regress. 

9.(T199) Sammitiya: The thing at locus B is the same as the thing 
previously at locus A because there is no cause for anything new 
arising. 

Vasubandhu: But the preceding thing at locus A could be the cause 
of the thing at locus B. This is like the case where an awareness arises 
from another awareness, or curds arise from milk, etc. (These are 
examples of what the Vaibhasika calls "homogeneous causes" (see Kosa 
Il, 52). 

10.(T99-100) If a thing is stable, it can have no movement. And if 
it is not stable, it can also have no movement (because movement is 
defined as "the progression of the same thing to another locus). 
Motion cannot be demonstrated, though it is true that it cannot always 
be demonstrated that the thing at locus B is clearly different, either. 

11.(T100-101) Sauryodayika:! There is a special kind of factor that 
makes something new arise in locus B immediately after another thing 
at locus A. This is called "motion", though really there is no 
progression of the same thing. 

Vasubandhu: Such a special entity can in no way be perceived or 
deduced. It is through the motile gaseous element (see Kosa I, 12) that 
something arises at another locus immediately subsequent to 
something else at locus A. 

12-13.(T101-102) Sauryodayika: Are you defining "manifest 
karma" as the motile element? 

Vasubandhu: No, because the motile element can be neither good 
nor bad, and "manifest action" refers only to acts with a karmic 
retribution. For the same reason, several other alternatives raised by 
the Sauryodayika (the body itself is manifest karma, color which arises 
from a special awareness is manifest karma, etc.) are also rejected by 
Vasubandhu. 

Since there is no kind of entity under which "manifest karma" can 





1.Sauryodayikas were followers of 67.Kumaralata, one of whose 
works was titled Stiryodaya. 


KARMASIDDHIPRAKARANA 581 


be subsumed, the concept of "manifest karma" itself must be rejected. 

14.(T102) Arguments against the Vaibhasika concept of 
"unmanifest karma", which are similar to those in Kosa IV, 3-4). 
Additional elaboration of the example of a monk who doesn't confess 
his misdeeds during the recital of the pratimoksa rules: the monk has 
incurred the retribution for a bad act by remaining silent, and yet there 
has been no good or bad "manifest action" which would by necessity 
according to the Vaibhasika precede an unmanifest action. 

15-17.(T103-104) How can bodily and vocal actions give the result 
of a retribution when they are long past? The Vaibhasika explains it by 
the existence of the past and the future. Vasubandhu thus next argues 
against this Vaibhasika theory. These arguments are akin to those in 
KoSa V, 27, with some added subtleties. If the Vaibhasika claims that 
an action becomes "past" because it no longer exercises its full efficacy 
of projecting an effect, it must be asked why it ceases to do so. The 
Vaibhasika replies that the act no longer projects an effect because it 
has already completed projecting it, just as what has arisen does not 
arise again. (The Vaibhasika vocabulary employed here involves some 
technicalities.) An act "projects" (aksip) an effect as long as it is 
present, but it "gives" its retributional effect when it is already past. 
The "projection" of an effect includes, for instance, it being directly 
perceivable by one or more kinds of sensory consciousnesses, which 
can occur only for present events. 

Vasubandhu: Why can't a past act project another effect similar to 
the one it did when it was present? How does it project an effect at all? 

Vaibhasika: It prepares a consciousness for the possibility of 
perceiving it. 

Vasubandhu: There are some factors which never project an effect, 
for instance, the last state of one who has overcome all frustration. If 
your theory is to hold, this last state is never present, and thus can 
never become past, either. If an act ceases to project its effect as soon 
as it becomes past, but yet continues to exercise some kind of force, the 
problem is to determine this force, as well as the final giving of a 
retributional effect. The idea of an existing past and future event must 
be rejected. 

18.(T104-105) Opponent: In that case, the retributional force of an 
act must lie in a special factor dissociated from awareness which is 
associated with good and bad bodily and verbal acts. This theory is in 
fact accepted by the Mahasamghikas, who call it "accumulation", and 


582 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


by the Sammitiyas, who call it "the imperishable". 

19.(T105) Vasubandhu: But the question of what accounts for the 
goodness or badness of an action is only part of a broader problem of 
psychic continuity. Since "accumulation" or "the imperishable" occur 
only for good or bad actions, it cannot explain a memory which comes 
from a totally karmically indeterminate act such as studying a text. If 
there is a special kind of entity which makes a memory arise, there is 
the problem as to which moment produces this entity. Is it the moment 
of the initial perception of the object which is later remembered, the 
moment in which the memory arises, or yet some other moment? None 
of these alternatives can explain the phenomenon. In the attainment 
of the cessation of feelings and identifications, the awareness-series is 
interrupted. Yet after a while the awareness-series resumes with all the 
memories of those past awarenesses before the series was suspended 
by the attainment. How is this to be explained? Can one really have 
recourse to "a special kind of entity" in these cases? When a lemon 
flower is dyed red, there is no special entity which can account for its 
fruit also being red long after the flower has perished. (Cf. Kosa II, 44) 

20.(T105) Rather it is the entire series from flower to fruit that has 
been penetrated by the dye. In the same way, a special force 
(Saktivigesa) is produced within the awareness-series by a decision, 
and a retributional effect arises through a transformation of the series 
which has been altered by this decision. 

21.(T105-106) This explanation may also help in understanding 
memory. A perception of an object transforms the awareness-series to 
which it belongs, and this transformation is the conditional ground for 
a future memory. But the problem of the continuity of consciousness 
before and after noncognitional trance states still remains. 

22.(T106) Some Sautrantikas attempt to explain this continuity in 
the same way: The awareness-series is transformed by its decisions and 
memories, and this transformed series retakes its course after the 
meditative trance ceases. 

Vasubandhu: But how does it "retake its course"? 

Sautrantika: The awareness which attains the trance is the directly 
antecedent condition (see Kosa I, 44) for the awareness-series which 
emerges after the attainment. 

Vasubandhu: But the awareness that attains the trance has elapsed 
long before the trance ceases. So how can it be a directly antecedent 
condition? We have already rejected the notion of an effect being 


KARMASIDDHIPRAKARANA 583 


brought about by that which is completely past. 

23.(T106-107) Some other Sautrantikas say that the seeds of the 
awareness-series (see KoSa II, 35-36) rest upon the material organs 
during the trance. 

Vasubandhu: But an awareness cannot arise where the material 
organs do not function so as to give rise to an awareness! 

24.(T107) Opponent: The flaw lies within the theory that these 
trance states are without awareness. Bhadanta Vasumitra, in his 
Pariprecha, says there is a kind of awareness within the attainment of 
the cessation of feelings and identifications (cf. KogaI, 16). 

25.(T107-108) Vasubandhu: What kind of an awareness is this? 

Opponent: It could be a mental consciousness (cf. Kosa I, 16). 

Vasubandhu: But a siitra clearly says that a mental consciousness 
can arise only dependent upon manas (meaning a case of any 
consciousness of any of the six types--cf. Kosa I, 16-17--as well as a 
mentally cognizable factor, and at the same time there must be 
feelings, identifications, and thoughts. 

Opponent: Though there is a siitra which says that craving is 
conditioned by feelings, yet not all feelings are conditions of craving. 
So in the same way, the contact of consciousness with its object is not 
always a condition for feelings. 

Vasubandhu: But there are stitras which clearly distinguish which 
feelings give rise to craving, whereas contacts have nowhere been 
distinguished. (Cf. KoSa II, 44) 

26.(T108-109) Sautrantika: The attainment of the cessation of 
feelings and identifications is a state where there exists a mental 
consciousness without the force to enter into contact with mentally 
cognizables, and thus powerless to help give rise to feelings and 
identifications. 

Vasubandhu: To which ethical category does this mental 
consciousness belong? Is it good, or defiled, or neutral? 

27.(T109) If it is good, how can it be so without being connected 
with the good roots: lack of greed, lack of hatred and lack of delusion? 
When these good roots occur there must of necessity be contact, 
feelings and identifications as well. (Conditioning factors must 
depend upon decisions to be good.) The "lack of greed" occurring in 
trance is not lack of greed as a good root, because no choice can arise 
there, due to the absence of contact with a specific object. In the 
absence of such choice, and in the absence of consciously-motivated 


584 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


good roots, there can be no good awareness. 

Sautrantika: What if it were good because it is the result of a 
directly antecedent condition which is good? 

Vasubandhu: Even if it were such a result this would not guarantee 
its being good itself. Immediately subsequent to something good there 
may arise an awareness which is bad. If good roots exist for a good 
awareness directly preceding the trance, it is difficult to see why these 
should suddenly vanish within the trance. Whatever awareness exists 
in the trance can also clearly not be bad. The trance can be called 
"good" only in the same way that final cessation is (i.e., it is really 
karmically indeterminate--since nothing results from it--and is good 
only in the sense of being a good goal). Similarly, it cannot be defiled, 
because there can be no defilement without contact with an object, 
and such contact presupposes feelings and identifications. If it is 
unobstructed-neutral, is it the result of retribution, or is it related to 
bodily postures, to artistic activity, or to magical creations?! 

28.(T109-110) Since one of the purposes of meditation is to sever 
defiled awarenesses which are retributional, all mental retributional 
consciousnesses will be severed by trance. Any retributional awareness 
which involves traces of the past is in fact removed in trance. 

29.(E110-111) The awareness in the trance can clearly not be 
related to bodily postures either, since an awareness related to bodily 
posture has as its content the particular posture intended, and this 
cannot occur without awarenesses. 

As the other two types of unobstructed-neutral mental 
consciousness cannot occur in the meditational trance for similar 
reasons, it cannot be that the awareness in the trance state is a mental 
consciousness. 





1.Only these four types of awareness are traditionally regarded as 
unobstructed but neutral by the Vibhasd-inspired philosophers. 
Anything born of retribution is by necessity neutral, and 
awarenesses concerned with artistic or professional activity, and 
with postures of the body such as sitting, lying, etc., are of course 
also karmically indeterminate and unobstructed. The fourth category 
of awareness refers to any awareness which produces fantasies, 
which beholds a magical creation, or which deals with afterimages 
in meditation. Cf. Kosa Il, 71-72. 


se ol ate 


KARMASIDDHIPRAKARANA 585 


30.(T111-112) Instead, it must be assumed that there is a special 
kind of retributory consciousness. This consciousness has all the seeds 
coloring future perceptions, continues in a stream, takes on various 
forms because of various retributory causes, and is not severed until 
nirvana. Both the theoreticians who say that the trance state is without 
awareness and those who say that it involves awareness are right, for 
all other kinds of awareness are severed in trance. 

31.(T112) There are two kinds of awareness: one accumulates 
seeds; the second is variegated on account of having various contents. 

32.(T112-113) The trance state impairs the emergence of the 
effects of the seeds to a conscious level. But this impairment gradually 
becomes weaker and weaker, in the same way as there is a gradual 
diminution of boiling water, or in the velocity of a projected arrow. 
During the time of the trance, the retributory consciousness continues 
to operate and transform, so that once the impairing force has stopped, 
all the other consciousnesses renew themselves with the seeds of 
perceptions of the past. The retributory consciousness is only the seeds 
themselves. They change and are influenced by the good and bad 
events arising in the series of the other consciousnesses with which 
they are connected, and thus bring about retributional effects. This 
kind of retributory or appropriating consciousness (adanavijfiana) is 
mentioned in the Mahayana 136.Samdhinirmocanasitra.! 

33.(T113) It is called "appropriating consciousness" because it 
appropriates a body at the time of rebirth. Because it is the support of 
the seeds of all experienced events, it is also called the "store- 
consciousness" (dlayavijfiana). 

34.(T113-114) By what other consciousness could a body be 
appropriated? If there is no store-consciousness, where do the residues 
of defilements abide when the defilements themselves have been 
removed? Why doesn't an organism just die when it has reached the 
highest meditational states where all the other kinds of consciousness 
are severed? Homogeneity-force and life-force, which are used by 
Vaibhasikas to explain this, are not really entities, because they are 
only metaphors for the similarity and perpetuation of retributor- 
aggregates. (Cf. Kosa Il, 41, 45) 


1.This is the first hint we have that Vasubandhu is a Mahayanist 
at the time of the writing of this treatise. 


586 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


35.(T114) The Theravadins accept such a special consciousness 
which they call "the consciousness which is the requisite for existence" 
(bhavagravijfiana).** The Mahasamghikas also accept it. They call it 
the "root consciousness" (milavijfidna). 

36.(T114) Opponent: What is the content of this consciousness? 

Vasubandhu: Its content is undiscerned. 

Opponent: How can it be a consciousness then? 

Vasubandhu: Anyone who claims that there is consciousness in 
trance faces the same problem. 

Opponent: To which aggregate does it belong? 

Vasubandhu: To the aggregate of consciousness. 

37.(T114-115) Opponent: The aggregate of consciousness has been 
defined in stitras as being only the six types of consciousness (see Kosa 
I, 16). 

Vasubandhu: The intent there was to speak only of the 
consciousnesses which are easily delimited, in order not to confuse 
learners. Some learners might confuse the store-consciousness with a 
self. 

Opponent: And why would they do that? 

Vasubandhu: Because the store-consciousness is without 
fundamental changes. 

38.(T115) Opponent: Then there will be two consciousness-series 
simultaneously. 

Vasubandhu: So what? 

Opponent: A body which has two consciousness-series must be 
regarded as two sentient beings. 

Vasubandhu: No, because the two series are related. The store- 
consciousness stores traces from the other consciousnesses; these in 
turn color all future consciousnesses. , 

39.(T115-116) Opponent: Aren't you ignoring the difference 
between a seed and the series which has the seed? 

Vasubandhu: Sometimes there is no difference. 

40.(T116-117) Opponent: Why not just accept a self? 

Vasubandhu: What do you mean by a "self"? If a self is only a series 
of factors which transform themselves constantly through conditions 
then itis the same as the store-consciousness. But if you claim a self 
which is single and devoid of transformations, then you can't explain 
how itcan be influenced by past traces. It is the traces which make the 
consclousness-series continue in certain grooves. If there is nothing 


KARMASIDDHIPRAKARANA 587 


which undergoes transformation, then no trace is possible. So how can 
memories, recognitions, passions, etc., arise from an immutable 
entity? If the arising of a consciousness is subject to the self, why does 
it arise gradually, as there are no transformations within the self? 

41.(T117) But in the same way, the Vaibhasika definition of the 
three kinds of acts (cf. 1-2) must also be rejected. For it is thinking 
which causes transformations in a consciousness-series. 

42.(T117) Bodily and vocal actions were taught in order to make 
beings avoid the performance of bad actions. The Jains claim that only 
bodily actions have retribution, and it was to refute this claim that 
three types of action were spoken of. 

43.(T118) The body is a special collection of great material 
elements and materiality derived from the great elements (see Kosa1, 
12), a corporeal mass connected with sense-faculties. Action is 
volition. Thus, bodily action is a volition directed toward the body. 

44.(T118) A body exists only as an accumulation of factors. 

45. (T118) An act is prepared behavior. 

46.(T118-119) A volition which sets the body into agitation is called 
"a bodily act". There are three kinds of volitions: those which prepare, 
those which decide, and those which set into agitation. It is always the 
volition which carries a retributory result. 

47.(T119) Though sitras distinguish "volition" and "the act 
committed after having willed", the latter is really the volition which 
sets into agitation. 

48.(T119) Vocal action is a volition which brings about speech, i.e., 
those special vocal emissions which communicate meanings. 

49.(T120) Opponent: If bodily action is only volition, how can there 
be either restraint or lack of restraint in those who are of distracted 
awareness or without the six kinds of awareness, as there can be no 
volition in these states? 

Vasubandhu: The traces left by volitions have not been suppressed 
in these states, thus restraint or lack of restraint may exist there. 

50.(T120) Only actions connected with a conscious effort are 
discussed here, because only these have a retributory effect. The 
simple performances of the eye, etc., have no such effect. An “action 
connected with an effort" is anything which motivates a consciousness- 
series. 


588 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


198. VASUBANDHU, Vrtti on Asai ga's Dharmadharm atavibhaga 


The entire Sanskrit text of this work has now been found, but aside 
from one Sanskrit fragment published at the end of Levi's (and 
consequently Bagchi's) edition of the 165.Mahaydnasiitralamkara®> 
itis not yet available. The Tibetan translations, in both its Derge (sDe- 
dge) and Peking editions, were collated and edited by Josh Nozawa 
in Yamaguchi hakukshi hanreki kinen Indogaku Bukkyégaku rons6é 
(Kyoto, 1955), pp. 19-45. This is our "T". The Tibetan translators are 
Majana Pandita and Blo-Idan-ses-rab. 

In view of its importance this is a work that has remained strangely 
neglected. Since the time Stefan Anacker prepared this summary he 
has published a paper in which the work is summarized: "An 
unravelling of the Dharma-dharmata-vibhaga-vrtti of Vasubandhu" 
Asiatische Studien/Etudes Bouddhiques 46.1, 1992, 26.36, which 
should be consulted for further details on the contents of this work. 


Summary by Stefan Anacker 


(T20) The "distinction" (vibhaga) referred to in the title is that 
between factors (dharma), which have the characteristic of affliction 
and the true nature of factors (dharmata), which has the characteristic 
of purification. 

The question arises whether the two can be definitely distinguished 
Itis, after all, nothing but the aggregates, senses, etc., which may be 
subsumed under either of these two broader categories, 

Nonetheless a distinction between factors and the true nature of 
factors can be made in regard to the aggregates, etc. 

(T21) A factor is the construction of what was not 
(abhittaparikalpa), which always involves the construction of a 
duality. In fact, whenever there is the conception of "an object 
apprehended", a duality is implied: e.g., "visible" implies visual 
consciousness as well. 

(T22) All conception of "essential nature" and differentiation is 
Construction of what was not. The construction of what was not may 
be described as the appearance of that which doesn't exist as existin 
That which does not exist may appear to exist, and will only a 
discerned as nonexistent with careful mental attention. All factors 
constructed by the construction of that which is not will be seen to be 


DHARMADHARMATAVIBHAGAVRTTI 589 


illusion. And such is the characteristic of all factors. 

The characteristic of the true nature of factors, on the other hand, 
is the undifferentiated suchness (aviSesatathata) which lies behind all 
so-called objects apprehended, subjects apprehending, things which 
can be designated and their designation. For example, there is no 
difference between that which can be designated and its designation. 

(T23) It is the illusion which arises because of the appearance of the 
nonexistent as existent which is the cause of affliction, or rather it is 
the subsequent insistence on holding fast to such illusions which is the 
cause of affliction. 

Objection: How can there be the appearance of the nonexistent as 
existent? 

Reply: As in the case of an elephant seen in a magic show. It is the 
construction of that which was not which makes the nonexistent 
appear as existent, and this appearance of the nonexistent as existent 
is the defining characteristic of illusion. Accordingly, without the 
appearance of the nonexistent as existent, there could be no illusion, 
and without illusion, there could be no freedom from illusion. 

(T24) There could be no affliction, either, since illusion is the cause 
of affliction. And if there is no affliction, there could be no purification 
either. Because anterior to purification there must be affliction. 
Without affliction, liberation would take place without any effort, and 
this is contradicted by direct perception. 

(T25) Factors and the true nature of factors must be regarded as 
being neither the same (for the reasons given above) nor different, for 
in the latter case the aggregate-series' realizing purification would 
never be possible. Factors and the true nature of factors can be 
differentiated because the nonexistent and the existent can be 
differentiated, but the existent and the nonexistent really cannot be 
differentiated, because the true nature of factors is only realized when 
there are no factors, and when objects apprehended, etc., are not 
differentiated. 

The correct investigation of a factor rests on six aspects: (A1) a 
factor's characteristic mark, (A2) the proof of that mark, (A3) a factor's 
separatedness and nonseparatedness, (A4) a factor's locus or occasion 
for arising, (A5) that which a factor has in common with other factors, 
and which it doesn't, (A6) understanding the absence of the 
appearances (pratibhdsa) of object apprehended and_ subject 

apprehending. 


590 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


(Al) The characteristic marks of factors are always talked 
about in a manner which is an unreal construction, in which the 
nonexistent appears as existent. (A2) The proof of this is that without 
the nonexisting appearing as existent, there could logically not be 
illusion or lack of illusion, and neither affliction nor purification. (A3) 
"Separatedness" and "nonseparatedness" relate to existence and 
nonexistence, distinction and nondistinction; thus a factor is existent 
as perceived, is nonexistent because of being a construction, is distinct 
as it appears, is nondistinct as nonexistent. 

(T26) (A4) "Locus" relates to the environment, i.e., samsara. (AS) 
"That which it has in common with other factors" relates to its birth, its 
practical activity, its utility (upakara) or detriment (apakara), its being 
a good quality or a flaw. "That which it does not have in common with 
other factors" relates to the nature of its basis, i.e., the store- 
consciousness, the nature of its evolving consciousnesses 
(pravrttivijfiana) which make it appear, and its karmic effect as good, 
bad and neutral. 

(127) This is said because the origin of each factor lies in a different 
store-consciousness-series or in a different moment of "the same" store- 
consciousness-series, and its becoming manifest depends always on a 
particular evolving consciousness-moment not shared by other factors. 
Its karmic effect is also peculiar to it alone. 

(A6) "Understanding the nonbeing of appearances of object 
apprehended and subject apprehending" means realizing that the 
"external" arises because of perceptions ("manifesting": vijfapti), and 
that perceptions arise differently in regard to the same moment for 
different consciousness-series, and thus can't relate to an "objective" 
object. 

(128) Perceptions may be divided into trance perceptions and the 
ordinary ones. The ordinary kind includes all perceptions where an 
object apprehended appears through construction, and where this 
serves as an object of sense for one awareness but not for another. 
Trance perception relates to perceptions of images in meditational 
concentration which are not shared by other consciousness-moments. 
Again, we see by these examples the nonexistence of an "objective" 
object shared in one moment by all consciousness-series present. If the 
“object apprehended" has no existence, the "sub ject apprehending" has 
no existence either. 


(T29) In a perfected state, neither object apprehended or subject 


DHARMADHARMATAVIBHAGAVRTTI 591 


apprehender appear. 

The correct investigation of the true nature of factors rests on six 
aspects: (B1) its characteristic, (B2) its locus, (B3) its penetration, 
(B4) its contact, (B5) its recollection, and (B6) understanding its 
nature. 

(B1) The characteristic of the true nature of factors is suchness, 
where there is no differentiation of object apprehended, subject 
apprehending, that which can be designated, and its designations. 

(B2) The locus of the true nature of factors is the material factors 
making up the aggregates. It is they which undergo affliction and 
purification. 

(T30) (B3) The penetration of the true nature of factors is all of the 
factors in the path of application comprised by mental attention on all 
methods (in all aspects) in Mahayana siitras: hearing, contemplating, 
practicing. 

(B4) The "contact" of the true nature of factors: In the path of vision 
right vision is attained, that is, it is experienced by direct perception. 

(BS) Recollection of the true nature of factors is the memory of the 
experience of the path of vision which leads to the allies of 
enlightenment, i.e., the path of cultivation. The path of cultivation 
begins immediately after the path of vision, and it is the memory of its 
fulfilled penetration which impels all the allies of enlightenment, i.e., 
the elimination of the roots of all afflictions. 

(T31) (B6) The understanding of the true nature of factors: that, 
because the roots of all afflictions can be eliminated in the path of 
cultivation, suchness is without afflictions, and signless suchness is all 
there is. This is realized in a revolution at the basis (@srayaparavrtti). 

The correct investigation of "revolution at the basis" rests on ten 
aspects: (C1) its essential nature, (C2) its actuality, (C3) the persons 
(pudgala) who realize it, (C4) its special quality, (C5) its use, (C6) its 
locus, (C7) its mental attention, (C8) its application, (C9) its benefit 
(anugamsa), (C10) its correct investigation (pravesa). 

(C1) The essential nature of revolution at the basis: flawless 
suchness, which has only adventitious flaws. Suchness is not 
manifested because of adventitious flaws, but they are manifest in a 
realization of suchness. 

(C2) The actuality of revolution at the basis: (1) a revolution 
through the suchness of the perceptions relating to the common 
environment, (2) a revolution through the suchness of the 


592 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


dharmadhatu in the stitras, (3) a revolution they do not hold in 
common. 

(C3) The persons who realize revolution at the basis: The first two 
of the revolutions mentioned immediately above occur only to 
Bodhisattvas, i.e., only Bodhisattvas are interested in a "revolution" of 
the common environment, e.g, that not only themselves, but all 
sentient beings may be liberated; and only Bodhisattvas know of the 
dharmadhatu mentioned in the Mahayana sutras. The third occurs 
also with Sravakas and Pratyekabuddhas as well as with Bodhisattvas, 
and refers to a revolution undergone by the "individual" alone. 

(C4) The special quality of revolution at the basis: (1) its special 
quality of purifying the Buddha-fields of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, 
which includes the ability to teach the stainless knowledge of suchness 
to others, (2) its special quality of seizing the nature of awareness: this 
occurs in a knowledge of all aspects, (3) the special quality of realizing 
the higher faculties, etc., for the sake of all beings. These three relate 
to the dharma-, sambhoga- and nirmana-kayas respectively. 

(C5) The use of revolution at the basis: (1) it fulfills former vows of 
the Bodhisattva; (2) it displays the Mahayana teachings, (3) it is of use 
in the ten stages. 

(C6) The locus of revolution at the basis is constructionfree 
awareness. How can constructionfree awareness be entered? In six 
ways: through its supporting object, through the abandoning of all 
signs, through its right use, through its characteristic, through its 
benefit, and through its complete comprehension. 

(T34-35) (C7) The basis for constructionfree awareness is the 
Mahayana teachings, resolve in them, gaining certainty, and 
accumulating all preparations (sambhdarapariptiri). Through the 
abandoning of all signs, even the subtlest of signs will be lacking. 

(C8) The right use of constructionfree awareness is the 
apprehension of consciousness-only (vijfiaptimatropalambha), i.e., the 
nonapprehension of any object, thus the nonapprehension of 
consciousness-only itself in the absence of any object, and the 
nonapprehension of both objects and consciousness-only. The 
characteristic of constructionfree awareness is that it is based on the 
true nature of factors, that it is free from duality, and that it is ineffable 
(nirabhilapya). Furthermore, because it is based on none of the sense- 
fields, it is unbased (apratisthita). For it is not an object of sense. It has 
no appearances, and has none of the appearances of materiality and 





DHARMADHARMATAVIBHAGAVRTTI 593 


the other aggregates. Because it has no perception, it is nonperception. 
All factors, through their appearances, become like space, (T36-38) for 
the mental marks of all sense-objects are absent. The benefit of 
constructionfree awareness has four aspects: it gains the dharmakaya, 
it dwells in the highest bliss, it has power over the teachings, it has 
preeminence in advising others. 

Complete constructionfree awareness has four aspects: (1) 
comprehension of antidotes, (2) comprehension of characteristic 
marks, (3) comprehension of its special qualities, and (4) 
comprehension of its action. Comprehension of antidotes is equivalent 
to constructionfree awareness because it is the antidote to all ideas of 
personality, transformation, separatedness, denial of the existent, 
taking the nonexistent for the existent. An apprehension of a 
nonexistent separatedness comes, for instance, when there is an 
insistence upon separating factors from their true nature, for actually 
factors and the true nature of factors are not separate. The 
comprehension of its characteristic marks has to do with its nonmental 
attention to signs, its passing beyond all signs, the inner peace of signs, 
its having no discriminations by its essential nature, and seizing the 
meaning of its special char: teristic. These are the categories of the 
Maitreyanatha/Asanga text, to which Vasubandhu, however, objects. 

Objection: If constructionfree awareness were simply a nonmental 
attention to constructions, then little children would have this 
awareness. If constructionfree awareness were simply a case of passing 
beyond all constructions, then it would be attained already at the 
second of the four meditational stages, because it is entirely without 
initial or sustained thought. If constructionfree awareness were simply 
a putting to rest of all constructions, then states of sleep, intoxication 
and fainting would be included in this knowledge. If constructionfree 
awareness were defined simply by its basic nature of having no 
constructions, then the aggregate of matter would be constructionfree 
awareness, since it does not discriminate. If constructionfree 
awareness were simply the seizing of its special characteristic, then by 
being mentally attentive to the fact that there is constructionfree 
awareness it would be attained. In fact, Vasubandhu concludes, 
constructionfree awareness is free from all these characteristics. Thus, 
for him, the complete knowledge of the characteristic of 
constructionfree awareness is a complete knowledge of the fact that 
constructionfree awareness has no characteristics. 


594 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


The comprehension of the special qualities of constructionfree 
awareness are: no discrimination, unlimited, its being unbased 
anywhere, its permanence, and its supremacy. As far as its special 
quality of no discrimination is concerned, disciples and self- 
enlightened ones do not reach this, since they always have 
discriminations of qualities and flaws in samsara. They are always 
trying to determine in terms of the four noble truths, and are thus not 
with its unlimited character, either. They are basing themselves on 
liberation, and thus are not unbased. They do not realize its 
permanence, since they seek it in a nirvana where there are no factors. 
They are not involved in supremacy, since the highest state is that of 
a Buddha, which only Mahayanists strive for. 

By considering the opposites of these propositions the special 
qualities of constructionfree awareness can be known. For in 
constructionfree awareness there is no consideration of nirvana and 
samsara, good qualities or flaws. It is not limited, because it reaches 
the limits of the knowable. It is unbased, because it is based on neither 
nirvana nor samsara. 

(T39) It is permanent, because through it a nirvana without a 
remainder (nirupadhisesanirvana) is attained. It is supreme in its 


action, because it removes discriminations; because it brings about the _ 


supreme benefit, the elimination of obstructions (cf. 
200.Madhyantavibhagabhasya II), because it allows one to enter the 
subsequently attained knowledge which again makes use of 
discriminations, but only for purposes of method and without 
attachment to them; because it clears the Buddha-field; because it 
matures sentient beings; and because it grants the knowledge of all 
aspects. Vasubandhu makes further comments: it involves the 
elimination of all obstructions because it overcomes even past 
proclivities. He glosses "subsequently attained knowledge" as knowing 
all knowables in all aspects with a previous constructionfree 
awareness, even though the subsequently attained knowledge is again 
with objects. 

(T40) Constructionfree awareness removes mental proclivities of 
the past. 

It can first be understood that the mental construction of 
nonexistent objects is a case of perception-only; afterwards, through 
this apprehension, the nonapprehension of all objects is attained, 
through perception-only. Once this nonapprehension of all objects is 


DHARMADHARMATAVIBHAGAVRTTI 595 


reached, the nonapprehension of consciousness-only is reached, 
because it is illogical that there be "perception" without an object to be 
perceived. 

(T41) Similarly, once the nondistinguishing of object apprehended 
and subject apprehender is reached, it can be understood that dualities 
in general do not exist. Thus, if there is mental attention to these 
sequences, constructionfree knowledge itself can be reached. In this 
way, there is the nonapprehension of even the factors accepted in 
Buddhism: aggregates, etc. In fact, the definition of constructionfree 
awareness is the nonapprehension of any mental signs. 

The application of revolution at the basis: The first "practice" in the 
practice of interest in Mahayanic resolve; this is followed by the 
practice of discrimination in the path of vision, the practice of 
cultivation in the path of cultivation (see 
194.Madhyantavibhagabhasya IV), and the completely skilled 
practice, where constructionfree awareness comes spontaneously and 
there is no longer anything to be consciously done. 

(T42) (C9) There are four kinds of apprehensions of flaws which 
come when there is no revolution at the basis. One apprehension of a 
flaw comes when it is considered that there is no basis for nonentry 
into afflictions: Without revolution of a basis, afflicted states could 
never enter the true nature of factors. Just as there must be a basis for 
entry into afflictions, there must by necessity be a basis for nonentry 
into afflictions. It is thus that impure consciousnesses have a basis, and 
their antidotes also have a basis. The second apprehension of a flaw is 
that there is no basis for entry into a path, for instance, when it is 
assumed that personality necessarily belongs to samsara. But it is the 
aggregates which give rise to the idea of a personality, and it is also 
they that constitute the basis of personality in nirvana. 

(T43) Some people conclude from this that awareness is itself 
suchness, but this doesn't hold, because of the arising of adverse 
factors (vipaksa) and of antidotes (pratipaksa). The basis of adverse 
factors, ie., awareness, cannot be the same as the basis of the 
antidotes, because they are mutually exclusive, just as cold and heat 
are. 

The third and fourth apprehensions of flaws are not especially 
commented on by Vasubandhu. They are: assuming that there is no 
basis for the conception of a personality in nirvana--i.e., that there is 
nothing lying behind such an erroneous conception, and that there is 


596 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


no basis for the conceptions of the excellences of the three kinds of 
enlightenment (i.e., though these conceptions are false, there is 
something which lies behind them, and it is a flaw to deny this). In 
sum, there is a basis for revolution, and by realizing the opposite of 
these apprehensions of flaws, the four kinds of qualities in the true 
nature of factors are known. 

(C10) Examples of construction of what is not and of factors: 
magical creations, dreams, mirages, a city of Gandharvas, a reflection 
in a mirror, the moon in the water. In all these cases, an object is 
apprehended which does not exist. And so it is for all factors. 

(T44) Revolution at the basis takes place without any factors or any 
conception of factors--thus it is that these similes are used for so-called 
factors. The similes for "revolution at the basis": space, gold, and 
water, which are pure by nature. Space may be obstructed by fog, and 
be utterly cleared from it the next moment. In the same way, 
emptiness is obscured by adventitious flaws, but cleared from them in 
one moment. In the same way, gold may be found in a mine vein 
mixed together with dirt, but the dirt was only "adventitiously" 
connected with the gold, and may be totally removed from it. In the 
same way, water in a stream may be connected with particles of earth, 
and may be cleared from them without the arising of anything new--in 
fact it was clear from the beginning. In this way the basic luminousness 
of revolution at the basis can be exemplified. 

(T45) It is when the appearance of adventitious obstructions is 
removed that they no longer appear. That which appears to be 
separated from them is the true nature of factors, but since it was there 
from the beginning, there is no "arising" or "appearance" of it, properly 
speaking. This is true because a revolution at the basis may take place 
at any moment. By giving the examples of gold and water one can see 
that this state of affairs is endowed with a positive parallel example. 


Clothes being washed from adventitious flaws can also serve as an 
example. 


199. VASUBANDHU, Bhasya on Asanga's Mahayanasitralamkara 
Summary by Stefan Anacker 


This excellent and subtle commentary seems to be an earlier work 


MAHAYANASUTRALAMKARABHASYA 597 


of Vasubandhu's than the 200.Madhyantavibhagabhasya. For instance, 
some of the more radical statements of Maitreyanatha/Asahga are 
interpreted in such a manner that indicates that Vasubandhu probably 
didn't quite know what to do with them. There is a tendency to see 
"path philosophy" in passages which are clearly not "path philosophy" 
at all. Thus it is quite different from the Madhyantavibhagabhasya, 
which may be said to be more radical than the Maitreyanatha/Asanga 
text itself! 

"ET" refers to the edition and translation by Surekha Vijaya Limaye 
in Bibliotheca Indo-Buddhica Series No. 94, Delhi 1992. 


CHAPTER ONE 


4.(Et4-5) There are three kinds of special excellences to the 
dharma: it is like a medicine, as it removes the obstructions; it is the 
cause of psychic power, as it leads to the higher faculties of meditation; 
and it is the cause of the enjoyment of the noble knowledge. 
7.(ETS-7) Mahayana is defined as antidotes to the defilements 
coming through being based on constructionfree awareness. 
8.(ET7-8) Explains this as "the effortless development of knowledge 
in Buddhas". 
9.(ET8-9) Hinayana does not include the idea of service to others, 
nor the idea that one can become a Buddha, nor method (upaya, 
skillful means). 
10.(ET9-10) Hinayana strives for one's own nirvana in a short time, 
but to Mahayana this is an error. 
12.(ET11-12) Ways by which one can tell that the dharma is not an 
object of tarka. 
(1) Tarka has as its object truths which cannot be directly 
perceived. 
(2) Tarka is impermanent in form, as arguments change 
according to the requisites of different times. 
(3) Tarka does not penetrate all knowable objects of 
consciousness. 
(4) Tarka concerns conventional truth only and not the 
highest truths. 
(5) Tarka is a difficult topic, whereas Mahayana is always 
without difficulties, as the 53.Satasahasrikaprajfiaparamita and other 
sutras teach. 


598 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 
CHAPTER THREE 


8.(ET37-38) The Bodhisattva risks dangers for a long time. She or 
he quickly releases others from them, and is aware of even the smallest 
frustrations which have arisen for them. With an agitated spirit, full of 
compassion, she or he matures the sentient beings she or he meets. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


1.(ET42-43) The great enthusiasm in Mahayana is glossed as the 
deep and difficult concern to make antidotes arise for a long time. 

8.(ET46-47) The arising of the awareness of enlightenment is 
ultimately connected with rejoicing at the joy of others. 

9.(ET46-47) The sameness of awareness towards all phenomena 
arises with the knowledge of the selflessness of all factors. The 
sameness of awareness towards sentient beings arises with a 
knowledge of the sameness of "self" and “others". The sameness of 
awareness towards what sentient beings do arises from the knowledge 
that they all desire the end of frustration as much as "oneself" does. 
The sameness of awareness towards Buddhahood comes with the 
knowledge of the nondifference between "oneself' and the 
dharmadhatu. The knowledge of clearing the Buddha-fields is 
equivalent to the knowledge of spiritual method. 

23.(ETS4) Vasubandhu explains "unmindful of one's own body": 
one can be unmindful of one's own body and life for the sake of others. 

24-25.(ET55-56) By seeing all factors as a magical creation, the 
Bodhisattva doesn't fear defilements at the time of accomplishment. By 
seeing them all as unsubstantial as a scarecrow, he does not fear 
frustration in adverse time, because the awareness of enlightenment 
is devoid of fear. 

26.(ET56) Vasubandhu sees this verse as counteracting the fear of 
frustration, 

27.(ET57) and sees this one as counteracting indifference towards 


others. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


4-S.(ET61-62) There are thirteen different activities for the sake of 


MAHAYANASUTRALAMKARABHASYA 599 


others: (1) advice, (2) instructing, (3) winning over others through 
supernatural powers, (4) bringing others to the dharma through 
making them understand the teachings, (5) keeping them in the 
dharma by severing their doubts, (6) maturing them in the good, (7) 
specific instructions for steadiness in awareness, i.e., meditational 
concentration,*°° (8) deliverance through wisdom, (9) full knowledge 
through the higher faculties, etc., (10) birth in the tathagatakula, (11) 
prediction of full enlightenment, (12) consecration on the tenth stage, 
and (13) the knowledge of tathagatas. All these are seen as activities 
for the sake of others. 


CHAPTER SIX 


1.(ET68-69) Ultimate truth is a nondual object. This nonduality is 
revealed in five aspects: It does not exist because of the characteristic 
marks of the constructed and dependent; it doesn't fail to exist because 
of the characteristic marks of the perfected. But by this fact there is still 
nonbeing for the perfected, except when being one with the 
constructed and dependent. Yet it does not exist in a different way, 
because of the nonbeing in it of any otherness between the two. It 
neither arises nor ceases, because of the nonconditionedness of the 
dharmadhatu. It neither diminishes nor increases, because in it there 
is the cessation of the alternatives of defilement and purification. It is 
not purified, because it is undefiled by nature. Nor is it not unpurified, 
because of the removal of adventitious defilements. 

2.(ET69-70) Even the view of self itself does not have the 
characteristics of a self. Nor does the self undergo any frustrated state 
according to those who believe in it. Thus the view of self, being itself 
linked with frustration, is devoid of the characteristics of "self" as 
constructed. The five aggregates, however, evolve because of the 
power of depravity through defilements. The unchanging 
characteristic of self, or its being always in a blissful state, is thus not 
demonstrated. Since the view of self is a delusion the idea that there 
is liberation is also a delusion, since there is nobody to be liberated. 

3-4.(ET70-71) As long as people rely on the view of self which is 
only delusion, they don't see the frustrating nature of motivating 
dispositions. For this frustrating nature may go unnoticed. But once 
noticed through an experience of frustration it can be seen that there 
is frustration for the frustrated one. But since there is no self, it is not 


600 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


right to speak of a frustrated one. For everything consists only of 
factors, because of the selflessness of personality. And yet it does not 
consist of factors, because of the selflessness of factors. People could 
observe by direct perception that such and such factors arise through 
such and such conditions. How is it that people don't see dependent 
origination which manifestly exists, and instead search after a self 
which doesn't exist? 

6-9.(ET72-74) Explains these verses as to a successive path: (1) 
When preparations are fulfilled, and one's cultivation is based on 
meditational concentration, one realizes that all events are only 
mental talk. (2) Realizing that all this is only mental talk, one realizes 
that it is only awareness which makes factors appear. (3) Then seeing 
the dharmadhatu by direct perception one is freed from any 
characteristics of duality, thus also from the idea of object and subject. 
This takes place on the path of vision. Once it is realized that there is 
no supporting object apart from consciousness, one understands the 
nonexistence of awareness-only itself, because of the nonexistence of 
the subject. (4) Through the power of constructionfree knowledge, 
taking as its basis the dependent (and not the constructed), the 
Bodhisattva works for the removal of defilements in the spiritual path. 


CHAPTER NINE 


1-3.(ET103-104) The state of knowledge of everything in all aspects 
is equivalent to Buddhahood. 

4-S.(ET104-105) All factors are Buddhahood, because there are no 
divisions in suchness. And there is not a single factor in Buddhahood. 
It is only from the constructed point of view that there are good and 
bad factors. 

12.(ET109-110) This verse relates to the seeds of adverse factors, 
and shows how a revolution at the basis occurs through the completion 
of the antidotes through attainment of a path based on supramundane 
(constructionfree) knowledge, and on the path based on the 
succeeding mundane and supramundane knowledge (where factors 
are again seen separately, but only for purposes of spiritual method). 

24.(ET116) Buddhahood can't be called a being, because of the 
selflessness of self and factors. Nor can it be called a nonbeing, because 
of the being of the tathagata-characteristics. 

60.(ET135) Briefly explains the three Buddha-bodies: dharmakaya 


ecwmibatn 


gy 


hematite ts 


ae 


MAHAYANASUTRALAMKARABHASYA 601 


= revolution at the basis; sambhogakaya = body of Buddha which 
appears in the mandalas; nirmanakaya = bodily manifestations 
Buddhas take on for the sake of sentient beings. 

77.(ET143-144) It is not so much the three different vehicles which 
are intended here, Vasubandhu says. It's rather that there are limitless 
Buddha-lineages. One Buddha does not become enlightened in the 
same way as any other will. 

Objection: But in that case all preparations for merit and knowledge 
are useless, if they are not applicable to other Bodhisattvas. 

Reply: They are applicable, but in spite of this there is no one 
Buddha to liberate all sentient beings. And yet there is no Buddhahood 
which is not established in some Buddha! There can be no Buddha 
without the preparations, and without relying on some already 
enlightened Buddha, but for this very reason one Buddha is not logical. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 


1.(ET159-161) The Tripitaka consists of stitra, vinaya, and 
abhidharma. But, according to whether they relate to Hinayana or 
Mahayana, it can be divided into two sections only: Sravakapitaka and 
Bodhisattvapitaka. In either case, the term "pitaka" is used because 
they are compilations or abridgements of all objects which are to be 
known. The Sitrapitaka gives the basis of the teaching, Vinaya relates 
to antidotes to the two extremes (lust for life and desire for death), and 
Abhidharma relates to skill in determining the exact meanings of terms 
used in the dharma. The Tripitaka first changes proclivities, then 
brings knowledge, then calm, then penetration. Through hearing it, 
new proclivities are started; by reflecting on it, knowledge arises. By 
cultivating the measures recommended in it, calm is reached. And by 
insight penetration is gained. The dualities inherent in the Tripitaka 
relate to the division between object and subject inherent in language. 
But suchness is realized when object and subject are seen as undivided. 

6-7.(ET164-166) True understanding of the dharma depends on 
three higher faculties. In the faculty which consists of hearing the 
dharma, the understanding which is gained is still framed in mental 
talk, i-e., the constructed. In the faculty which consists in reflecting 
upon the dharma, there is the fixing of the mind on what one has 
heard, and this is still framed in mental talk. The faculty which consists 
of cultivation involves putting into practice all that which has been 


602 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


understood by reflecting upon the dharma. 

8-12.(ET166-171) Further elaborations of this sequence. 

13.(ET171-172) Reality is always separate from dualities because 
the constructed, with its divisions of objects and subjects, does not 
exist in any way. Based on this illusion, the dependent further 
constructs it. The perfected, however, is ineffable and without illusion. 
The first is to be comprehended, the second is to be abandoned 
inasmuch as it constructs, and the third is to be cleared from 
adventitious flaws, though it is clear by nature. 

15.(ET173-174) The wood which the magician has before him ina 
magic show while he is uttering the mantra to make it appear 
differently is like the dependent as constructing. The elephant which 
appears where the wood really is, is like the constructed. 

20.(ET176) Since the illusions of the constructed are not being, 
they are nonbeing. But its appearance is being, i.e., the illusion itself 
has being. Thus there is no distinction between "being" and "nonbeing". 
For the phenomenon which can be designated as "the being of the 
appearance" is the same as that which can be called "the nonbeing of 
the elephant." So the nonbeing of the elephant is the same as the being 
of the illusion. 

23.(ET177-178) The warding off of false superimposition and 
denial which is sought by Hinayana assumes that when the nonbeing 
of a nonbeing is understood, it is no longer falsely superimposed on 
experience, and that when the being of a being is understood, it is no 
longer falsely denied. But when it is known that there is no difference 
between being and nonbeing, one is not alarmed by any "being", and 
one does not seek nirvana in the manner of the Hinayana. 

25-26.(ET177-178) Duality is constructed through the illusion of an 
object apprehended, such as a magically-created elephant. When this 
illusion is no longer seen, both object apprehended and subject 
apprehender are seen to be nonexistent, and there is no longer any 
duality which is apprehended. 

27.(ET179-180) Both the illusions and that which serve as their 
antidotes are existent and nonexistent, like a magical creation. Why is 
this? They are existent because of being in that way through the 
construction of what was not. They are nonexistent because of the 
appearance of object apprehended and subject apprehender, which are 
nonexistent. Thus, since both being and nonbeing are 
indistinguishable, they are both existent and nonexistent, like a 


MAHAYANASUTRALAMKARABHASYA 603 


magical creation. 

28.(ET180) The same thing applies to all stages in Buddhist 
practice--establishments of mindfulness, etc. 

29.(ET181) Antidotal phenomena are themselves illusory, also, but 
are effective in removing those other illusions which are the 
defilements. 

31.(ET183) A construction of what was not is a construction which 
is not in conformity with supramundane knowledge. It is being until 
the aids to penetration, then it is neither being nor nonbeing. Suchness 
and supramundane knowledge are without constructions. The 
subsequently attained knowledge is neither construction nor absence 
of construction (since constructions are used as method but are not 
clung to). 

35.(ET186) The "coloring" of experience relates to the intrusion of 
attachments, aversions, etc. 

37.(ET187) Vasubandhu amends the Mahaydnasiitralamkara by 
stating that this awareness which makes a characterized thing appear 
is both consciousness and materiality. By "views" Vasubandhu further 
adds, not only views but all accompanying mental factors are 
intended. 

38.(ET187-188) In speaking ‘of "characteristics" one can always 
further subdivide, by reason of the three essential natures. For 
instance, three characteristics can be determined in the constructed, 
the sign of the cognition of an object arising because of talk, the 
proclivities of this talk, and the appearance of this object because of 
the proclivities. 

40.(ET189) There are three kinds of appearances: the appearance 
of words, the appearance of objects of sense and understanding, and 
the appearance of material forms or bodies. These three kinds of 
appearances figure in the "internal" appearances, which are mind, 
taking up of "objects", and construction. "Mind" in this connection is 
equivalent to the seventh, ego-forming consciousness or defiled mind. 
The taking up of "objects" is equivalent to the five sensory 
consciousnesses. But their discrimination takes place because of the 
sixth consciousness, mental consciousness. The true characteristic of 
an "object apprehended" is the first three kinds of appearances 
(appearance of words, objects, and material forms); the true 
characteristic of a "subject apprehender" is the second of the three 
kinds 0: appearances (above). All of them constitute the construction 


604 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of what was not, i.e., the dependent as constructing. 

41.(ET190) The characteristic of the perfected, suchness, is 
nonbeing because it is the nonbeing of the constructed, and it is being 
because of the being of this nonbeing. Thus "being" and "nonbeing" are 
unseparate. It is noncalmed because of adventitious defilements; it is 
calmed because it is clear by nature. It is nondiscrimination and 
nondiscriminatory. 

44-46. (ET192-194) It is through a revolution of the seeds that there 
is a revolution of consciousness. A revolution of consciousness arises 
when there is a nonappearance of words, objects of sense and 
understanding, and material forms. As a result of this nonappearance, 
there is the nonappearance of mind, taking up of objects, and 
discrimination. Four kinds of mastery result: lack of discriminations, 
lack of motivating dispositions, clearing the Buddha-field, and 
knowledge. These appear in full strength at different moments in the 
Bodhisattva path. 

47.(ET194-195) "Lack of self" in factors refers to the nonbeing of a 
constructed personality, and to the nonbeing of constructed events. It 
is not that persons and factors don't exist in any way. Actually, there is 
consciousness-only, which is the same as the act of apprehension. 
Ultimate liberation is where consciousness-only becomes manifest, and 
there is the nonapprehension of "persons" and "factors". 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 


11.(ET250) The Buddha is quoted in a sutra as saying that he is not 
speaking of deliverance from passion except through passion, from 
hatred except through hatred, from confusion except through 
confusion. Because, Vasubandhu comments, there is no event which 
is separate from the dharmadhatu, because of the nonbeing of a factor 
separate from dharmata. 

13.(ET251) If passions, etc., are taken up with carefulness, one may 
be liberated from them by completely knowing them. 

20-23.(ET254-256) The Bodhisattva has affection for all sentient 
beings. 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 


14.(ET261-262) Includes a detailed description of the different 


MAHAYANASUTRALAMKARABHASYA 605 
phases in meditational concentration. 
CHAPTER SIXTEEN 


16.(ET294-300) Elaborate description of the fivefold practice of the 
perfections: (1) based on limitations, as in spiritual method; (2) based 
on retribution--as when there is proclivity towards giving because one 
has given in the past; (3) being based on the Bodhisattva-vows; (4) 
being based on wisdom; (5) being based on mental attention. 
Vasubandhu emphasizes also the extensiveness and persistence of 
Mahayana compassion. All kinds of helping others are grouped under 
the perfection of giving. Rejoicing at the joy of others is seen as the 
basis for the perfection of moral precepts. 

30.(ET309) There is a sevenfold attachment possible: (1) 
attachment to enjoyments, (2) attachment to procrastinations, (3) 
attachment to satisfying only one's own requirements, (4) attachment 
to partiality, (5) attachment to reward, (6) attachment to karmic 
retribution, and (7) attachment to adverse factors. Only these 
attachments form an obstacle to the Mahayana. 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 


33-66.(ET358-377) Affection is the characteristic of Mahayana, 
which the loveless unaffectionate disciples and self-enlightened 
Buddhas lack. This affection is linked to compassion. 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 


82-83.(ET425-430) Arguments for momentariness. It is illogical 
that conditioned factors function without momentariness. 
Functioning, by its very definition, means the cessation of one state in 
favor of another. This also implies causality, as the preceding state 
conditions the next. As the cause must precede its effect, and as 
differences are perceptible from one moment to the next, a different 
thing arises in each moment. A sequence of causes is assumed because 
it is not logical that the thing cease by the same cause which made it 
arise. Why? Because there is a contradiction between arising and 
ceasing, and the causes of two contradictory results cannot be one, aS 
in the case of shade and light, cold and heat. The momentariness of all 


606 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


phenomena can be seen by direct perception, if there is mental 
attention. If a conditioned factor, once arisen, were to remain stable 
for a certain time, it would have to do so either of itself or because of 
some power which makes it remain stable. Now it is illogical that it 
have this capacity of itself, because later it does not remain stable of 
itself! As far as a power which makes it remain stable is concerned, 
such a power cannot be determined, because it cannot be 
apprehended. 

Objection: Even without such a power, the stability of a conditioned 
event is logical, because of there not being a cause for its destruction. 
It ceases only when the cause of its destruction is obtained, just as 
darkness is destroyed by fire. 

Answer: This is also illogical, because such a cause of destruction 
does not exist. It is really that the darkness-series is no longer 
perceived, and not that the darkness itself has been destroyed, because 
it will reappear again once the fire is removed. And when water is 
being boiled it decreases gradually through its contact with fire, until 
finally at the end it is no longer there. But this nonbeing didn't come 
about through a simple contact with fire (i.e., if fire were the cause of 
destruction of the water, the water would have to be destroyed 
immediately upon its contact with fire.)°°” 

Nor is the stability of things once arisen logical. The Buddha stated 
impermanence to be one of the characteristics of conditioned things. 
Now a characteristic, in order to truly be one, must have exclusivity. 
Thus, if a conditioned factor were not to be destroyed immediately 
upon arising, there would be a certain time period in which it wouldn't 
be impermanent--thus the exclusivity of the impermanence- 
characteristic would become absurd. Now it may be argued that if a 
conditioned factor arises in each moment, not having existed before, 
that this would be commonly recognized. But this argument is also not 
valid, because of the subtlety of the dissimilarity from moment A to 
moment B, which may make the difference in the two events 
imperceptible. That conditioned factors arise and perish in every 
moment proves that the "series", perceived often as one thing, does 
eventually cease, even without there being any special feature in the 
moment of cessation to distinguish it from the previous moment. In 
other words, if things were not changing all the time, it is difficult to 
see why they would ever change at all. 

Transformation means the state of becoming something else, and 


= 


MAHAYANASUTRALAMKARABHASYA 607 


this must begin already in moment A, otherwise it could never 
manifestly occur in moment B. 

In the case of mental phenomena, such as awarenesses, they can be 
directly observed to be momentary. And all conditioned events are the 
result of awareness. How is this known? It is through awareness that 
all conditioned factors are known, for in a state of fainting, they are 
not perceived. Thus they, as phenomena, are the result of awareness. 
Awareness is also sovereign over the conditioned factors because, as 
the Buddha says, it is through awarenesses that the living world is led 
along. It is also through awareness that internal conditioned factors 
can be totally transformed, as in the case of yogis. 

If awarenesses are momentary, their results (other conditioned 
factors) must also be momentary, because it is not logical that a 
momentary cause have anonmomentary result. 

85-88.(ET431-436) Comments here include arguments against the 
notion of motion,°*** but with a Madhyamaka twist: If there is such a 
phenomenon as motion, Vasubandhu says, does it exist when the 
conditioned factor has already arisen, or when it has not arisen? If it 
is when it has already arisen, then, because of the lapse of time it 
would take for it to move, it couldn't move, because it has no stability. 
Butif it had stability it couldn't move either. If it exists when it hasn't 
yet arisen, then, since it hasn't arisen yet, it is nonexistent, and thus 
can't move either. 

89-91.(ET436-441) Focuses on the momentariness of the four great 
material elements. Water is in a state of constant flux, and evaporates 
all the time. This transformation must be accepted as taking place in 
each moment, because there is an absence of any particular cause 
which would give rise to evaporation at a particular time only. Wind 
is inconstant by its nature, and is constantly increasing and decreasing. 
In combination with other elements, earth is also constantly changing. 
Fire is manifestly different in each moment. 

A flame along with its fuel cannot be demonstrated as existing when 
the flame or fuel has not yet arisen. Nor can a flame persist when the 
fuel is already burnt. (This again is an argument with a Madhyamaka 
twist!) 

Objection: When the fuel is already burnt, one cannot speak of it as 
"fuel" at all. 

Reply: Nonetheless, the momentariness of a flame is demonstrated 
in the same way as the momentariness of sounds. The momentariness 


608 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of sounds can be directly perceived by their gradual diminution. A 
gradual diminution is impossible without momentariness. 

Objection: But how do you know that all conditioned factors are 
momentary? Not everything is perceived to be different from one 
moment to the next. 

Reply: Even you admit that a flame is momentary, and yet it may 
appear to be unchanging, as in an oil-lamp. Following your argument, 
why don't you admit that the flame in an oil-lamp is nonmomentary, 
too? There are two kinds of differences: differences of essential nature 
and differences through development. The flame of an oil-lamp may 
be unchanging in its essential nature, and yet is different in each 
moment of development. 

Objection: That's all right for a flame, but if everything is 
momentary, even when a chariot is standing still, it would move, thus 
there would be no difference between it when stationary and moving. 

Reply: What appears to be stable to the eye may still be constantly 
changing, if exact perceptions are taken into account. For instance, in 
a burning oil-lamp, the wick is contantly being diminished, though this 
will not be visible in each moment to the eye. It is only because of an 
uninterrupted series of similar moments that the momentariness of 
given conditioned events is not recognized. And thus the perverted 
view arises that "it" is the same thing from one moment to the next. If 
this were not so, there could not be the perversion of taking the 
noneternal for the eternal, and in its absence, there could not be 
mental defilement, and in the absence of mental defilement, there 
could never be purification either. Thus the momentariness of all 
conditioned factors is demonstrated. 

92-103.(ET441-452)- Vasubandhu gives a long passage to 
demonstrate that "person" is only a designation and should never be 
perceived as an entity. Furthermore, it has no efficacy of its own which 
would distinguish it from the sensory domains. Also, the idea of a fixed 
personality is always linked with defilements to be eliminated in the 
path. 

CHAPTER NINETEEN 


4.(ET456-457) Absence of desires is unsurprising in the context of 
giving, compassion is unsurprising in the context of ethics and 
forbearance, the ultimate cultivation of antidotes is unsurprising in the 
context of vigor. 


MAHAYANASUTRALAMKARABHASYA 609 


47.(ET476-477) An investigation of a name is an investigation of 
the adventitiousness of the name in relation to the 'thing' it expresses. 
An investigation of a thing is an investigation of the adventitiousness 
of the thing in relation to the word that expresses it. 
Investigations using the conceptions of essential nature and specific 
characteristics are investigations based only on conceptions, e.g., 
conceptions of essential nature, specific characteristic, etc. 


CHAPTERS TWENTY AND TWENTY-ONE 


10-14.(E502-504) It is in the first stage that emptiness, i.e., the 
selflessness of persons and factors, is realized. In the second, the 
lasting karmic effects of action are realized. In the third, meditations 
are cultivated. In the fourth, by cultivating the aids to enlightenment 
to a great extent, a transformation of samsara is achieved. In the fifth, 
while being based on the four noble truths, one matures as many 
sentient beings through various treatises and works of art. In the sixth, 
one understands dependent origination completely, and guards 
against the rising of defilements. In the seventh, while understanding 
the unity of the diverse formulations of the path, one practises the one 
path, which is signless. In the eighth, one completely purifies the 
Buddha-field by achieving the lack of motivating dispositions and the 
signless. In the ninth, one perfects the ability to mature sentient beings 
by mastering the particular knowledges. In the tenth, one realizes 
perfect clarity through meditational concentration and the dharanis. 
In the eleventh, one attains the abandonment of all obstructions to the 
knowable. (As often, Vasubandhu interprets Maitreyanatha verses in 
reference to a successive path, where it is not clear that this was 
Maitreyanatha's original intention.) 

15-21.(ET504-508) are again explained as relating to a successive 
path. 

24.(ETS09) The stage where Mahayanic resolve is cultivated is not 
perfected, the rest are perfected, but of these seven are perfected and 
unperfected, the rest are perfected.°°° 

43.(ET521) Compassion is the desire to see sentient beings 
separated from frustrations; rejoicing at the joy of others is the desire 
to see sentient beings unseparated from joy. 

58. (ET532) Vasubandhu gives the three Buddha-bodies as 
svabhavika, sambhogika, and nairmanika. He says that they represent 


610 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the knowledge of everything that can be known in all aspects and that 
this has the effect of cutting away all beings' doubts. (Again a change, 
as the verse speaks of "desires", not "doubts".) 

60.(ET533-534) Perfectly clear suchness is the ultimate truth, and 
equals the perfected. It is the essential nature of Buddhas. It is the 
cause of deliverance in each Bodhisattva-stage. It is the ultimate 
fruition to be attained by sentient beings. It has the action of delivering 
all sentient beings. Its practice means becoming joined to 
indestructible and unequalled qualities. 

61.(ET534) One is seen in the world through the magical body, one 
is seen in the mandalas through the enjoyment body, and one is 
unseen through the dharma body. 


200. VASUBANDHU, Bhasya on Asanga's Madhyantavibhaga 
Summary by Stefan Anacker 


This is one of the several commentaries Vasubandhu wrote on 
works by Maitreyanatha/Asanga.%® It is a striking example of what 
can be called Yogacara Siinyavada: it delimits a path and uses the 
theory of the store-consciousness and of the three natures, and at the 
same time the only fundamental reality for it is emptiness (sunyata). 

"E" references are to the edition by Gadjin M. Nagao*’. "T" refers to 
the translation by Stefan Anacker.5® 


CHAPTER ONE*®? 


1. (E17; 1211-212) The construction of what was not 
(abhttaparikalpa) exists. It is the construction of object apprehended 
and subject apprehender (grahyagrahakavikalpa). But when this 
construction vanishes, then there is only emptiness. "Emptiness" can 
in fact be defined as the separation of the construction of what was not 
from the (apprehended) being of object apprehended and subject 
apprehender. Fundamentally, only emptiness exists in the construction 
of what was not, and the construction of what was not exists in 
emptiness. 

2.(E18; T212) Everything can be designated as neither empty nor 
nonempty. Both emptiness and the construction of what was not can 
render everything nonempty--emptiness because it is "itself" the flow 


MADHYANTAVIBHAGABHASYA 611 


of all factors, the construction of what was not because it constructs 
the flow into discrete entities. But everything is empty because there 
is the appearance of separate objects and subjects in the latter case, 
which constructions are seen to be empty. The nonexistence of duality 
is emptiness.5% 

3.(E18-19; T212-213) How do the dualities which come from the 
construction of what was not first arise? It is because of the existence 
of visibles, etc. that the appearance of objects separate from 
consciousness arises; it is because of the five sense-faculties in "one's 
own" and "others" series of psychophysical events that the appearance 
of sentient beings arises. The appearance of self or ego arises only with 
a defiled mind.*® Itis the six consciousnesses themselves which make 
the appearance of manifestations arise. But there is no real object for 
consciousness, because there is no fixed aspect to the appearances of 
objects and sentient beings, and because of the false state of 
appearances of the appearances of self and perceptions.*© In these 
four ways there is absence of objects, of sense-faculties, of mind, and 
of the six consciousnesses which cognize. But in their absence, the 
subject apprehender, fundamental consciousness, is also nonexistent. 

4.(E19; T213) The construction of what was not does not exist as it 
appears. Yet it is not totally nonexistent, because so much confusion 
does arise! Also, liberation is sought in the destruction of the 
construction of what was not--thus it can't be just nonexistent. 

5.(E19; T213) Even though this is only a construction of what was 
not, there is the possibility of speaking of three essential natures--three 
different kinds of reality. The constructed nature is an "object of sense 
and understanding." The capacity for this construction lies in the 
dependent nature. The nonexistence of object apprehended and 
subject apprehender is the perfected nature 

6.(E20; T214) There is a characteristic within the construction of 
what was not which allows it to penetrate its own nonexistent 
character. There is no more apprehension of objects of sense or 
understanding when there is the apprehension that everything is only 
manifestation. But a nonapprehension of consciousness-only comes 
about dependent upon this nonapprehension of objects. In this way, 
the nonexistent character of object apprehended and subject 
apprehender can be seen. 

7.(E20; T214) So these "apprehensions" just mentioned are really 
nonapprehensions, because there is nothing to be apprehended. 


612 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


8.(E20; T214-215) Awarenesses and accompanying factors are 
different divisions in the construction of what was not. "Observing an 
object" is awareness; "observing" in terms of special qualities are the 
accompanying factors.” 

9.(E20-21; T215) The construction of what was not may also be 
divided into two according to its functioning: there is the storehouse- 
consciousness, the conditioned ground for all other consciousnesses, 
on the one hand, and then there are the functioning consciousnesses 
(pravrttivijfiana) which relate to experience on the other. 

10-11a.(E21; T215-216) All of the limbs of dependent origination 
are the construction of what was not's characteristic of involving 
afflictions. 

11b.(E22; T216-217) Among the limbs of dependent origination, 
the afflictions proper are ignorance, craving and clinging; motivating 
dispositions and being (which depends on volition) are the afflictions 
which are karmic action; and the afflictions which come about by birth 
itself are the remaining limbs of dependent origination. The causal 
limbs are those of action and affliction; the resultant ones are the rest. 

12-13.(E22-23; T217-218) Emptiness is the nonexistence of duality 
and the being of this nonbeing. Thus it can be called neither being nor 
nonbeing. It is neither the same nor different from the construction of 
what was not. If it were different, the nature of a factor would be 
different from the factor itself, since emptiness is the nature of the 
construction of what was not. But they cannot be totally the same 
either, because if they were, there could be no alleviating knowledge. 

14.(E23; T218) Suchness, the reality-limit, the signless, the highest, 
and the dharmadhatu, are all synonyms for emptiness. 

16.(E24; T218-219) Emptiness may be either afflicted or alleviated. 
But it is adventitious flaws that make it afflicted. Fundamentally it is 
clear, just as the fundamentally clear nature of water is not changed by 
its becoming turbid, the nature of gold is not changed by its being 
hidden in the earth, and space is not changed by disturbances in space. 

17.(E25; T219) Sixteen kinds of emptiness can be spoken of: the 
emptiness of the personal, the emptiness of external, the emptiness of 
personal and external, the great emptiness, the emptiness of 
emptiness, the emptiness of highest truth, the emptiness of the 
conditioned, the emptiness of the unconditioned, the extended 
emptiness, the emptiness of "inferior" and "superior", the emptiness of 
nature, the emptiness of characteristic marks, the emptiness of all 


MADHYANTAVIBHAGABHASYA 613 


factors, the emptiness of nonbeing, and the emptiness of the essential _ 
nature of nonbeing. These can be known in brief as the emptiness of 
the personal, the emptiness of whatever is experienced, the emptiness 
of the body--the body being the seat of both personal and external, the 
emptiness of the insentient universe--this is the emptiness referred to 
as "the great emptiness", the emptiness of the emptiness through which 
it is seen that all is empty, and the emptiness of any object of 
understanding which may be resorted to. 

18-19.(E25-26; T219-220) The only reasons Bodhisattvas resort to 
an object of understanding is to aid other beings and to gain Buddha- 
knowledge. 

20.(E26; T2200 The nonbeing of persons and factors is emptiness, 
and it is also the existing being (sadbhava) of this nonbeing. This is 
said so that the superimposition of "persons" and "factors", as well as 
the denial (apavada) of emptiness, can be removed. 

22. (E27; T221-222) Constructions, dismay, idleness and perplexity 
are brought to rest by understanding emptiness. 


CHAPTER TWO 


1.(E28; T222) There are two kinds of obstructions, the obstructions 
which are defilements and the obstructions of the knowable. The first 
kind is the only type accepted by the Hinayana, but the Mahayana 
accepts both kinds as being obstructions. Aside from these,.there are 
the "excessive" obstructions of those who act with attachment, 
hostility, or confusion, the "equal" obstruction which is that of "those 
who make everything alike" and are governed by apathy, and the 
obstruction of completely accepting or abandoning samsara, which is 
again an obstruction peculiar to Mahayanists. 

2.(E28-29; T222-223) The obstructions which are defilements are 
equivalent to the fetters: attraction, which is an obstruction to 
agitation (agitation is desirable in Mahayana if it is of the kind that 
urges people to be active in the alleviation of frustration); repugnance, 
which is an obstruction to equanimity; pride, which leads to the view 
of self; ignorance, which is an obstacle to knowledge about external 
objects; holding fast to views, which is an obstruction to the 
knowledge of the truth of cessation of frustration, because of the 
anxieties caused by false views; addiction to moral precepts and vows, 
which is an obstruction to the truth of the path; perplexity, which is an 


614 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


obstruction to the knowledge of the qualities of Buddha, dharma and 
the order; envy, which is an obstruction to satisfaction in others' 
attainments; and selfishness, which is an obstruction to the knowledge 
of satisfaction with little. 

3-10a.(E29-31; T223-225) The obstructions of the knowable, which 
are obstructions specifically to the activist path of the Mahayana, are 
lack of means to rouse "oneself" from inactivity, lack of complete use 
of "one's" sense-fields, careless activity, nonproduction of good, lack of 
mental attention to what lies around one, failure to make the 
necessary preparation, separation from people in the same spiritual 
lineage, distress and agitation of awareness, lack of opportunity to 
practise the Mahayana, being forced to live with people who are 
counteractive to the practice of Mahay4na, natural susceptibility to 
harm, lack of control, lack of maturation of insight, attachment to 
becoming something particular, longing for enjoyment, muddle- 
headedness, lack of confidence, lack of faith, deliberating on things 
according to words only, lack of reverence for the dharma, respect for 
gain, lack of compassion, casting away what's been learned regarding 
the dharma, being ill-versed in the dharma, and lack of engagement in 
meditation. These are, by threes, obstructions to the welfare of others, 
to enlightenment, to lack of confusion, to the lack of obstructions, to 
the ability to evolve, to fearlessness, to lack of selfishness, and to 
control. 

10b.(E31-33; T225-227) There are ten kinds of causes. There is a 
cause as one thing's being the direct condition for the arising of 
another, such as when the eye gives rise to a visual consciousness. 
There is a cause as one thing's maintaining another, such as the food's 
maintaining sentient beings. There is a cause as one thing's providing 
a support for others, as the inhabited world does for sentient beings. 
There is a cause as one thing's manifesting another, as the action of 
looking causes the visible. There is a cause as one thing's transforming 
another, as fire does to that which is being cooked. There is a cause as 
one thing's disjoining another--this is the relation of a cutting 
instrument to that which is being cut. There is a cause as one thing's 
evolving another gradually, such as the action of a goldsmith, who 
makes bracelets out of masses of gold. There is a cause as one thing's 
giving rise to the idea of another, such as the perception of smoke 
giving rise to the idea of fire. There is a cause as one thing's making for 
the deduction of another, such as a justification in an inference-schema 


MADHYANTAVIBHAGABHASYA 615 


does for a thesis. There is a cause as one thing's leading to the 
attainment of another, such as the path leading to nirvana. 

Thus, an obstruction to the arising of alleviation is an obstruction to 
welfare of others; an obstruction to the maintenance of alleviation is 
an obstruction to enlightenment; an obstruction to the sustension of 
alleviation is an obstruction to the full taking up of samsara; an 
obstruction to manifesting it to others is an obstruction to insight; an 
obstruction to transformation is an obstruction to lack of confusion; an 
obstruction to becoming disjoined from obstructions are all the 
obstructions themselves; an obstruction to alleviation's gradually 
evolving is an obstruction to awareness’ ability to evolve towards 
enlightenment; an obstruction giving rise to the idea of Mahayana is 
an obstruction to fearlessness, because this idea does not arise where 
there is any fear; an obstruction to causing the idea of Mahayana to 
arise in others is an obstruction to lack of selfishness; an obstruction to 
its attainment is an obstruction to control. 

It is because of the desire to obtain enlightenment that the good 
roots are first made to arise. This means that the first awareness of 
enlightenment (bodhicitta) is necessary for the good in a Mahayana 
sense. Once there is some potency in the good roots, perversions, 
meaning such mental habits as lead invariably to frustration, can be 
removed. After perversions are removed in the path of vision, all 
obstructions are eradicated in the spiritual path. 

11.(E33; T228) Further obstructions to particular parts of practice 
are: lack of skill in regarding the meditational object, which is an 
obstruction to the establishments of mindfulness;** sloth, an 
obstruction to the right exertions; slackness and excitedness, two 
obstructions to concentration since they obstruct the faculties of 
interest, energy, awareness, and deliberation; noncultivation of the 
aids to liberation (faith in the basic direction of Mahayana practice, 
energy, mindfulness, meditational concentration, and insight) is an 
obstruction to the limbs of enlightenment; faulty views are an 
obstruction because they obstruct the path of vision. To the limbs of 
the path, essentially the path of meditation, natural susceptibility to 
harm (depravity, etc.) is an obstruction. 

12-13.(E34; T228-229) Enumeration of obstructions to the 
perfections (see V,6). 

14-16.(E234-36; T229-230) Obstructions to the stages in the career 
of a Bodhisattva: to the first stage, anything which obstructs the 


616 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


knowledge of the similarity of "self" and "others"; to the second, 
anything which obstructs the undertaking of special practices for the 
removal of defilements; to the third, any obstruction to courage; to the 
fourth, any obstruction of grasping; to the fifth, any obstruction to the 
similarity of motivation in all the stages; to the sixth the idea of 
defilement and alleviation itself is an obstruction, because in this stage 
it should be realized that no factor can be defiled or alleviated since no 
moment-event has any fixed nature or can be said to really arise at all; 
to the seventh, preoccupation with misleading diversities in the siitras 
is an obstruction; to the eight, any belief in "inferior" or "superior" is an 
obstruction. Four potencies arise in the last two states: potency in the 
absence of discriminations, achieved in the eighth stage; potency in 
total alleviation of one's "Buddha-field", also attained in the same 
stage; potency in the particular knowledges needed for sustaining this 
alleviating action in the ninth stage; and potency of action, which is 
the state of being able to do actions for the sake of sentient beings 
through various transformations of will in the tenth or Buddha-stage. 

17.(E36; T231) All of these obstructions may be enumerated in 
brief as the obstructions which are defilements (II, 2) and the 
obstructions of the knowable (all obstructions enumerated from II, 3 
to II, 16). 


CHAPTER THREE 


1-2.(E38; T231-232) Enumeration of the different kinds of reality 
(tattva) to be discussed in this chapter.5” 

3.(E38; T232) A basic kind of reality may be signalled, but this 
again is no unified reality, but is rather the three kinds of reality called 
"the constructed", "the dependent", and "the perfected". (See also I, 5) 

The constructed is always really nonexistent, "and thus there is 


reality in the constructed, because of its unreversedness."! The 





1.This extremely difficult passage seems to be a kind of a joke: The 
constructed does not change, because it is nonexistent, so it cannot 
be "reversed" or defiled by frustration-inducing mental habits. The 
nonexistent has a reality if it is so constructed. It is ultimately 
nonexistent in the sense that it can be utterly removed. But as long 
as it isn't, it has an effect, and thus has reality. 


2 — “ 


+ eager 


Se -aansaaRATT 





MADHYANTAVIBHAGABHASYA 617 


dependent is existent, but not in a real way, since there is a state of 
confusion in its appearance as long as the transformation to the 
perfected has not been made. The perfected is both existent and 
nonexistent. The perfected is existent as it is the removal of the 
"nonexistent" constructed, but by the same token it is nonexistent, 
since it is simply the nonexistence of the constructed. When the 
fulfilled is realized, "the perfected" is nonexistent, since the notion of 
"perfected" is constructed. 

4.(E38; T232) Each of these three kinds of realities may be related 
to a special realization, which may be called "the reality of the 
characteristic marks" (laksana-tattva). When it is realized that there 
is a false superimposition and denial involved in assuming "persons" 
and "factors", this relates to the constructed. When it is similarly 
realized for the assumption of "objects apprehended" and "subjects 
apprehending", this relates to the dependent. When it is realized that 
there is a false superimposition and denial involved in assuming 
anything's being or nonbeing, this relates to the perfected. 

5-6a.(E38-39; T233) The existence of impermanence, etc., is the 
constructed, dependent, and perfected, is an antidote to perverted 
views of permanence, etc., and thus the reality of impermanence, etc. 
is called "the reality of nonperversion". The constructed is 
impermanent because it is objects of sense and understanding which 
are seen to be nonexistent. The dependent is impermanent because it 
is objects of sense and understanding which are fluxional. And the 
perfected is impermanent because it goes through the phases of 
defilement and alleviation. 

6b.(E39; T233-234) Frustration exists in each of the three kinds of 
reality, also: the constructed is associated with that grasping that 
comes through intentness upon views concerning "persons" and 
"factors"; the dependent is associated with frustration because of the 
basic characteristics of the world itself, and the perfected is associated 
with frustration because of voluntary connection with frustration. 

7a.(E39-40; T234) Emptiness exists in each of the three also. The 
constructed is empty because it is not finally existent. The dependent 
is empty because it is not as it is constructed and yet is not totally 
nonexistent. And the perfected has the nature of emptiness itself. Thus, 





But as long as it isn't, it has an effect, and thus has reality. 


618 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


the emptiness of the constructed is its nonexistence; the emptiness of 
the dependent is the nonbeing of any definite thing; and the emptiness 
of the perfected is its fundamental nature. 

7b-8.(E40; T234-235) Selflessness exists in each of the three: the 
constructed because it has no characteristic mark, the dependent 
because it has a characteristic mark apart from the constructed, the 
perfected because it is selflessness by nature. 

The truth of the origination of frustration exists in all three also: by 
means of the proclivities which cause insistence on the constructed; 
actions causing frustration are dependent; and the nonseparation of 
suchness from the obstructions is the origination of frustration in the 
perfected. 

9a.(E40; T235-236) The truth of the cessation of suffering exists in 
all three: nonarising by nature in the constructed; nonarising of object 
apprehended and subject apprehender as things apart in the 
dependent; and the process from affliction to alleviation in the 
perfected. 

9b-10a.(E41; T236) The truth of the path leading to the cessation 
of frustration exists in all three also: in the comprehension of the 
constructed; in the comprehension and abandoning of the dependent 
as constructed; in the comprehension, acquisition and direct 
realization of the perfected. 

10b.(E41; T236) Conventional truth may belong to any of the three 
kinds of reality, because of the conventionality of designations, which 
relates to the constructed, the conventionality of perceptual 
understanding, which relates to the dependent, and the 
conventionality of words used in religious practice, which relates to 
the perfected. 

10c.(E41; T236) The highest truth relates only to the perfected. 

11b.(E41-420 T237) The perfected can be called both conditioned 
and unconditioned: unconditioned because it consummates a lack of 
transformation back into what was before; conditioned as all the 
things comprised in the path, which are perfected in the sense that 
they consummated a lack of the reverse. 

12.(E42; T237-238) There are two kinds of reality which are 
commonly called "accepted reality" (prasiddhatattva). There is that 
accepted by the world at large, which is due only to the constructed-- 
where, regarding a range of events, there is a certain sameness of 
views among all worldly people because their intellects have adapted 


MADHYANTAVIBHAGABHASYA 619 


themselves through acquaintance with certain conventional symbols. 
Then there is that accepted by right reasoning, which is whatever is 
established by logical rules which depend on the three instruments of 
knowledge: perception, inference, reliance on reliable authority. 

13.(E42-43; T238-239) There are three kinds of comprising reality: 
that through apprehending objects of sense of five varieties and the 
discrimination of their sensory characteristics, which occurs through 
the dependent; that through naming, which occurs through the 
constructed; that through suchness and right knowledge, which occurs 
through the perfected. 

14.(E43-44; T239) The reality of positive activity is the constructed 
and dependent. From it there evolves intentness and becoming 
disturbed. The clearing through the perception of characteristics 
comes about through the perfected. 

15-16a.(E44; T239-240) The reality of skill is an antidote to fixed 
views, for instance, skill in the concept of the aggregates, which serves 
as an antidote to the view of a self. There is a view of a self whenever 
there is the idea of one entity underlying a living being, a oneness 
comprising it, one cause, one experiencer, one doer, one in control of 
all its movements, one possessor, one entity lasting through time, one 
substratum for defilement and alleviation, one entity in meditational 
concentration, or one entity that is either bound or liberated. These 
views can be removed by observing the grasping involved in this 
supposed "oneness", "“causeness", "“experiencerness", "doerness", 


“on 


"independent", "possessorness", "being afflicted or cleared", "being in 
concentration", “being bound or being freed". 

16b.(E44; T240) The aggregates belong to all three kinds of reality. 
The concept of any aggregate is a construction, and thus belongs to 
constructed reality. But this construction rests on a discrimination, 
which belongs to the dependent. And when the aggregate in this sense 
takes part in realization, it belongs to the perfected. 

17a.(E45; T240-241) The aggregates can be known in three 
different ways. Every present materiality-momentis distinct from each 
past and future one, and each simultaneously-occurring materiality- 
moment is different from all the rest. On the other hand, in a given 
moment all the aggregates may be interreacting to such an extent that 
it is impossible to clearly divide them from one another. But again, one 
may distinguish them by their separate characteristics. 

17b.(E45; T241) It is the sensory realms of eyes, ears, nose, tongue, 


620 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


sensate body, and consciousness which are the objects of sense and 
understanding giving rise to the traces making for the concept of a 
"subject apprehender". Similarly, the sensory domains of visibles, 
sounds, smells, tastes, tactile sensations, and mentally cognizables, 
leave traces in the series, and this gives rise to the concept of "objects 
apprehended" which exist outside the consciousness-series. It is the 
traces of the visual, etc. consciousnesses themselves which make for 
the concept of "apprehension". All three are the result of traces, and 
the distinction between them is empty. 

18a.(E45; T241) The six internal sense-fields are the doors to felt 
experiences; the six external sense-fields are doors to the experience 
of distinguishing objects of sense and understanding. 

18b.(E45;T241-242) Dependentorigination, another concept used 
in the reality of skills, has as its aim non-superimposition and 
nondenial as regards cause, effect and activity. A superimposition 
arises, for instance, when a self is assumed; a denial occurs when it is 
claimed that nothing like causality takes place at all. 

20a.(E46-47; T242-243) The concept of the faculties also can serve 
in the reality of skills, as it also can counteract the idea of a unified self. 
They are explained here in a manner identical to Vasubandhu's 
emendation of Vaibhasika explanations at 173. AbhidharmakoSa ll, 1- 
4. 

20b.(E47; T243) The concept of time can also be used in the reality 

of skills. The completed efficacy of both cause and effect is referred to 
as "something in past time." If neither the efficacy of the cause or effect 
has been completed, it is called "something in future time." And if the 
efficacy of the cause has been completed, but the efficacy of the effect 
has not, it is called "something in present time". 

21.(E47; T243-244) As regards the four noble truths, which are also 
part of the "reality of skills": the truth of frustration is equivalent to 
feelings when it has preparatory ensnaring signs constricting it, and 
the rest of the truths have correspondingly to do with the arising of 
such ensnaring factors and their removal. 

22a.(E48; T244) The three "vehicles" (yana) of Buddhism, another 
concept used in the reality of skills, can be defined as follows: If 
through hearing from others about the so-called flaws of samsara and 
merits of nirvana, and emancipation from samsara is striven for, this 
is the vehicle of the disciples. If nothing is heard from others regarding 
these flaws and merits, but emancipation from samsara is sought "by 


MADHYANTAVIBHAGABHASYA 621 


oneself", this is the vehicle of the self-enlightened Buddhas. If a 
knowledge free from discriminations arises by itself, and through this 
knowledge there is emancipation, this is the Great Vehicle 
(mahayana). 

22b.(E48-49; T244-246) As regards the concepts of "conditioned" 
and "unconditioned", which are also used in the reality of skills, it can 
be known that all the consciousnesses, including the store- 
consciousness, all environmental factors, all experienced objects, all 
apprehensions, discriminations, and designations, all are conditioned. 
The unconditioned is everything that goes into a putting to rest of all 
these, which is equivalent to suchness and the path leading to 
cessation. 

The compact meaning of realities: One may summarize all these 
realities as being basically of two kinds: mirror-reality (adarsatattva), 
and the reality of that which is seen in the mirror (drgyatattva). Mirror- 
reality is the primary three-fold reality (constructed, dependent, 
perfected); the realities seen in the mirror are: the reality seen in the 
absence of pride of self, the reality seen in antidotes to perversions, the 
reality seen in the vehicle of the disciples, the reality seen in the Great 
Vehicle, the realities seen in the flaws of others; theories brought to 
light through logical investigation, the realities seen while revealing 
the Great Vehicle to others, the reality seen when one penetrates what 
can be known in all its aspects, the reality seen in revealing suchness, 
and the realities seen in penetrating the motives lying behind the 
different manners of grasping after "self". 


CHAPTER FOUR 


1.(E50; T246) The cultivation of antidotes to the obstructions is the 
practice of the allies of enlightenment (see Kosa VI, 66). Among them, 
the establishments of mindfulness (see Kosa VI, 14-18) can be related 
to the four noble truths, since depravity is a characteristic of the body, 
the cause of cravings is feelings, and disappearance of any fear of the 
cessation of self occurs when it is realized that "self" is only 
awarenesses, and it is through understanding conditioning factors that 
it is known which factors afflict and which alleviate. 

2.(ES0; T246-247) The right exertions follow on the establishment 
of mindfulness, and have to do with energy in the removal of bad 
factors, and in the engendering of good factors. 


622 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


3.(E251; T247) The practice of the bases of supernatural power 
follows upon that of the right exertions, and these bases are essentially 
skill in meditation. 

4.(E51; T247) The main flaws in meditational practice are sloth, 
forgetting instructions, slackness, excitedness, lack of motivating 
factors when slackness and excitedness are to be eliminated, and the 
presence of motivating factors which too definitely channel the flow 
of meditation once slackness and excitedness have been eliminated. 

6.(ES2; T248-249) The five faculties (faith, vigor, mindfulness, 
meditational concentration, and insight) arise after the bases of 
supernatural power. Faith is sovereign in zest for further practice, 
vigor is sovereign in the application of practice, mindfulness is 
sovereign for nonloss of the meditational object, meditational 
concentration is sovereign for the non-gliding-about of awareness, and 
insight is sovereign for the discernment of factors. 

7.(ES3; T249) When these faculties are powerful, they are called 
"the powers" (bala). The faculties are enumerated as they are because 
each is the cause of the next. 

8.(E53-54; T249-250) The limbs of enlightenment are the different 
factors contributing to enlightenment on the path of vision (see 
173.Abhidharmakoga VI, 25-26). The limb which is the basis of 
enlightenment is mindfulness, the limb which is enlightenment by 
nature is insight or the discernment of factors, the limb which delivers 
from afflicting characteristics is vigor, the limb which is of good effects 
to others is joy, the limbs which cause absence of affliction are 
tranquility, meditational concentration, and equanimity. 

9a.(E54; T250) The initial cause of absence of affliction is 
tranquillity, as it works against those afflictions caused by 
susceptibility to harm. The support for absence of affliction is 
meditational concentration, and by nature, absence of affliction is 
equanimity. 

12. (E55; T251-252) The establishments of mindfulness are not the 
same for followers of the Hinayana and Mahayana. The Hinayanists 
concentrate only on their own bodies, etc., and they do it for 
nonattachment. The Mahayanists are attentive to the bodies, etc., of 
both themselves and others, and do it neither for attachment nor for 
nonattachment. 

14.(E56; T252-253) The stages of the Bodhisattva result in 
complete enlightenment. The three "Buddha-bodies", sometimes 


MADHYANTAVIBHAGABHASYA 623 


mystically explained, are interpreted quite simply by Vasubandhu as 
follows: the situation of attaining enlightenment is the body of factors, 
the situation of being of good effect to others is the enjoyment-body, 
and the situation of completing beneficial actions is the magical body. 

15-18.(ES6-59; T253-256) The quest for enlightenment is a gradual 
process, going through the stages of disciples and adepts. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


1.(E60; T256) The supremacy of the Mahayana lies in its path, its 
supporting objects, and its full realization. 

3.(E61; T257-258) The practice of Mahayana is distinguished by its 
strength, persistence, development, indestructibility, continuity, lack 
of trouble, embracing of others, beginning undertakings, obtaining 
merit, steady flow, and fulfilment. 

6-7.(E62-63; T258-259) The perfections are giving, defined as all 
favoring of others; moral precepts, defined as the nonharming of 
others; patience, defined as the pardoning of all harm done by others; 
energy, defined as actively increasing the good qualities of meditation, 
wisdom, skill in means, and resolve in bringing enlightenment to 
others; power, defined as the twin strengths of calculation and 
cultivation of antidotes; and knowledge needed for liberating others. 

11.(E64; 1260-2610 Practice "after-dharma" involves actions which 
may have to be taken immediately after emerging from meditation. 
Distraction may arise then, because of the nature of things, because of 
the renewed impinging of the external, because of mental signs, 
because of susceptibility to harm, because of mental attention. 
Relishing the meditational state, slackness and excitedness are 
examples of distraction due to the internal; deliberate intention in 
meditation is an example of distraction due to mental signs; mental 
attention linked with a sense of "I" is distraction due to susceptibility 
to harm, as it is through the force of susceptibility to harm that the 
pride of thinking "I exist" arises. 

13-14.(E65; T262) In connection with a so-called object, it may be 
thought: "Such and such is its name!": such a statement has meaning 
only because of past familiarity, but is meaningless being based on 
error. 

15.(E65-66; T262) A lack of perversion in regard to an "object" 
arises when it is observed that the "object" does not exist as it appears, 


624 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


since it appears with the duality of object and subject. This lack of 
perversion is avoidance of the idea of the object's existence, because of 
the absence of object apprehended and subject apprehender, and also 
avoidance of the idea of the object's absence, because of its erroneous 
appearance. 

16.(E66; T262) It is mental attention towards talk which is the basis 
for the discrimination between object apprehended and subject 
apprehender. 

17.(E66; T262-263) In what way can an object be said to exist, in 
what way not to exist? The object is to be regarded like a magical 
creation. A magical creation does not exist with the true being of 
elephant, etc., produced in the spectator’s visual field in a magic show, 
and yet it doesn't not exist, because of the existence of the illusion 
itself. In this way, there can be a removal of the very concepts of 
"being" and "nonbeing". 

18.(E67; T263) Everything, from visibles seen by the eyes to 
cognizables grasped by the mind, is only names. 

19.(E67; T263) Nota single factor is found without the absence of 
self. Therefore, emptiness is the universal characteristic of all factors. 
(In other words, the universal characteristic of all factors is that they 
have no characteristic!) 

20.(E67; 1263-264) Nonclarity in emptiness is only the 
nonabandonment of perverted mental attention. 

22.(E68-69; T264-265) Because there are neither persons nor 
factors, there can be neither afflictions nor alleviations for them. So 
there is no detriment and no excellence. So how can there be fear? 
How can there be pride? 

The Ten Thunderous Words (vajrapadani): The existence of the 
perfected, the nonexistence of the constructed, the dependent being 
the locus of both, its likeness to a magical creation, lack of 
discriminations, luminousness of nature, affliction and alleviation, 
their likeness to space, lack of detriment, and lack of excellence. 

Objection: If the constructed does not exist, why is it apprehended? 
If it does exist, luminousness of nature is not logical. 

Answer: That which is magically created does not exist, and yet is 
apprehended. 

Objection: If there is luminousness of nature, how can there be 
afflictions? 

Answer: Space, which is perfectly pure by nature, may yet be 


MADHYANTAVIBHAGABHASYA 625 


disturbed. 

Objection: If the afflictions of limitless beings have been brought to 
rest with the arising of limitless Buddhas, why has there been no 
eradication of samsara? 

Answer: There is no detriment in samsara, and no excellence in 
nirvana. 

23-26.(E70-73; T266-270) The practice of the avoidance of 
extremes: To say that there is a difference between materiality, etc., 
and the self, is an extreme, and to say that there is an identity between 
them is also an extreme. To avoid these extremes there is the middle 
path, where there is no consideration of "self" or of "humanity". To say 
that there is no life-force except the body is another view. The extreme 
of the Jains is to say that this materiality is eternal; the extreme of the 
Hinayana Buddhists is to say that it is not eternal. To avoid these 
extremes there is the middle path, which regards it as neither eternal 
nor noneternal. If it is said "There is a self", this is the extreme of 
superimposing a fixed personality; if one says "All is without a self", 
this is the extreme of denial. To avoid these extremes there is a middle 
path free from discriminations, which neither maintains nor denies 
"self". To say "A consciousness-moment just existed" is an extreme of 
superimposition; to say that it didn't exist is an extreme of denial. To 
avoid these extremes there is a middle path, where there is no 
awareness, volition, mind, or consciousness. To assume bad factors is 
an extreme; to assume antidotes is an extreme. To avoid these 
extremes, there is a middle path, which has nothing to do with 
dualities. It is an extreme to say that factors continue to exist; it is an 
extreme to say that they cease to exist. Any duality of ignorance and 
wisdom is equally an extreme. To avoid it, there is the middle path, 
which says that ignorance and wisdom are not separate, because of the 
nonbeing of the notions of ignorance, wisdom, objects apprehended, 
apprehenders, etc. 

Practically, the antidote to views, attachment, hostility and 
confusion are the emptiness in knowledge, the signlessness of 
knowledge, and aimlessness in knowledge. To unafflicted and afflicted 
motivating dispositions the antidote is the lack of motivating 
dispositions in knowledge; to the afflictions of birth, the antidote is the 
lack of arising in knowledge, and lack of essential nature in 
knowledge. But all this can be said only by way of expedience, because 
there are no afflictions or alleviations by nature, and assuming 


626 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


dualities of this kind is an extreme. An avoidance of extremes comes 
by not making factors empty by calling them "empty", and yet seeing 
all factors as empty. 

Discriminations in regard to being and nonbeing are extreme. A 
discrimination in regard to nonbeing is, for instance, one as follows: 
the person must exist because it is through its destruction that 
emptiness, an absence of self, exists. To avoid this extreme: Emptiness 
doesn't occur because of the destruction of person, rather, emptiness 
is already empty, by the emptiness of the extremes of assuming 
"anything previous", the emptiness of the extreme of assuming 
"anything subsequent", and the emptiness of the present. 

A discrimination as to "something to be abandoned" is an extreme 
because of the fear that arises with such conceptions. For avoiding this 
extreme, there is the example of space (see comments on Ten 
Thunderbolt Words, above). A discrimination of "something to be 
feared" is an extreme. For avoiding it, there is the example of the 
painter.°” 

Adiscrimination of "objects apprehended" or "subject apprehender" 
is an extreme. To avoid it, there is the example of the magician (see V, 
17). With the knowledge of manifesting-only, there is no separate 
object. But with the knowledge that there is no object, there is no 
"manifesting-only". 

Adiscrimination of "rightness" or "wrongness" is an extreme. For all 
investigations are investigations of what is already past, hence no 
longer existent. For avoiding this extreme, there is the example of two 
sticks of wood. Just as from the friction of two sticks of wood a fire 
suddenly arises and burns up the two sticks, just so an examination of 
how factors were, which has no rightness, makes that which has the 
characteristic of rightness, i.e., the faculty of insight, arise. And when 
it has arisen, it causes the same investigation to disappear. For there 
is no rightness without an investigation of what already was, which has 
the characteristic of wrongness. 

A discrimination of "practice" and "non-practice" is an extreme. For 
there is no practice leading to enlightenment or non-practice not 
leading to enlightenment. To avoid this extreme there is the example 
of the oil-lamp.5”! 

A discrimination of nonarising or simultaneity is an extreme.°”? To 
avoid this extreme there is the second example of the oil-lamp.°”* 

29-30.(E74-77; T271) Not remaining tranquil in the state of 


MADHYANTAVIBHAGABHASYA 627 


complete nonobstruction is one of the full realizations of activist 
Mahayana. Others rest in the skills in aiding others, fulfillment of the 
perfections, being non-based in either samsara or nirvana. 

This treatise is so named because it separates the Middle Path from 
extremes, explains the Middle and extremes, and the ways of avoiding 
extremes. 


201. VASUBANDHU, Bhasya on Asanga's Mahayanasamgraha 
Summary by Stefan Anacker 


The Sanskrit original does not exist. Of old translations, there are 
the following: (1) Tibetan, by Jinamitra, Silendrabodhi, Yes-Ses-sde: 
Peking. Tokyo Tibetan Tripitaka volumes 112-113; (2) Chinese, by 
Hsiian-tsang, Taisho 1597. No modern translations or summaries 
(except the following one, which is incomplete) exist, though 
occasionally Lamotte quotes from it.5”* Most often, though, Lamotte 
refers to the Upanibandha of Asvabhava. 


INTRODUCTION 


1.Vasubandhu begins his commentary with a discussion of 
canonical Buddhist literature in general. This is similar to his 
comments in 198.Mahdaydanasiitralamka@rabhasya XI, 1-3: Sutra, 
vinaya, and abhidharma form the three pitakas, but one can also speak 
of two pitakas only, the Sravakapitaka (Hinayana) and the 
Bodhisattvapitaka (Mahayana). What is the necessity for their being 
three pitakas? The Siitrapitaka is an antidote to perplexity, as it always 
gives a precise meaning. The Vinaya is an antidote to questions 
regarding the two extremes to be avoided (the two extremes are desire 
for life and desire for death), as it gives remedies for excessive 
attachment to pleasures, while at the same time permitting pleasures 
which are not offences. The Abhidharma is an antidote to self- 
concocted theories, because it illuminates the unreversed (aviparita) 
characteristics of factors. The Siitrapitaka teaches the three trainings: 
higher virtue, higher awareness through meditational concentration, 
and higher wisdom. The Vinaya puts into effect the first two, while the 
Abhidharma puts into effect the third. The Sitra presents theses, the 
Vinaya completes the sense of these theses, and the Abhidharma 


628 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


settles disputes raised by these theses. By hearing the tripitaka, new 
proclivities are set into motion in consciousness; by reflecting on its 
meaning, calm is cultivated, and by penetrating its meaning, insight is 
reached. Bodhisattvas reach omniscience in this way; disciples destroy 
their propensities to contaminants in this way. The Sutras always tell 
where a sermon was given, deal with both conventional and highest 
truths, and introduce the concept of aggregates, dependent 
origination, and meditations. The Abhidharma systematically shows 
a path to liberation and gives definitions of each factor raised in the 
Sutras. The Vinaya has as its aim the recognition of offences and their 
censure, confession, etc. 

2.(1) The "support of that which can be known": "What can be 
known" are defiled and purified factors, the three essential natures. 
"Support" = cause = the store-house-consciousness. (2) "Characteris- 
tics of that which can be known" are the three essential natures. (3) 
"Entry into the characteristics of that which can be known" involves the 
method for understanding these characteristics, i.e., consciousness- 
only. (7) "Higher awareness involved in these practices" is 
meditational concentration. 

3.Constructionfree knowledge is different for Bodhisattvas and 
disciples. For disciples it means not making fundamental mistakes, 
such as taking that which is impermanent for the permanent, the 
nonexistent for the existent, etc. For Bodhisattvas, it means not to have 
any conception whatever. 

4.These ten subjects, if properly understood, deny neither samsara 
nor nirvana. 

5.Considering the construction of what was not as existent is 
"superimposition". Denying the perfected is "denial". After realizing 
consciousness-only, Bodhisattvas cultivate the six perfections, then, in 
the ten stages, they cultivate them to an ultimate extent. They do this 
for innumerable lives. In this they differ from disciples, who liberate 
themselves after only three lives. During the concluding part of the 
cultivation of the stages they fulfill the three trainings completely. 
Finally, they reach nirvana, in the sense of complete enlightenment. 


CHAPTER ONE 


1."Support", that is, cause, because the storehouse-consciousness is 
the place of origin of all factors. How is the storehouse-consciousness 


MAHAYANASAMGRAHABHASYA 629 


the cause of nirvana? Because there must be a state of defilement 
before there can be a state of purification. 

2.In order to show that the storehouse-consciousness is also the 
place of origin of ethically neutral factors it is stated that the 
storehouse-consciousness has all the seeds. 

3."All factors are settled in the storehouse-consciousness" means all 
factors function in the storehouse-consciousness. "Settles in all factors" 
means the storehouse-consciousness develops in all factors. 

4.Two kinds of appropriations can be distinguished: the 
appropriation of material organs and the appropriation of signs, 
names, discriminations, and ensuing manifoldness which are based on 


.the seeds of the storehouse-consciousness and which grow and 


increase there. The storehouse-consciousness collects also all the 
traces of visibles, sounds, smells, tastes, tangibles, and mentally 
cognizables, and on account of these traces the six consciousnesses 
relating to these objects of sense continue. 

5.A visual consciousness arises dependent on a visible and the eye, 
together with the storehouse-consciousness.*”> 

6.Whether it arises from two kinds of sensory consciousnesses, or 
from three, from four, or from five all together, the resulting mental 
consciousness-moment is always one. But innumerable discriminations 
and notions may follow from this mental consciousness. It is as one 
disturbance in water causing innumerable waves to arise, or one 
mirror reflecting innumerable images. But those who have realized 
ultimate truth see no basis for holding to different essential natures, 
see no appropriating consciousness, see no storehouse-consciousness, 
see no accumulation of traces, see no awarenesses, see no eye, see no 
visible, see no visual consciousnesses, or any other consciousnesses or 
their organs or objects, see no mind, see no factors, see no mental 
consciousness. Only those who do not observe any of these factors can 
be called skilled in ultimate truth. 

The storehouse-consciousness could never be mistaken for a self for 
this reason, and also because innumerable transformations arise in and 
from it all the time, as waves arise in disturbed water. : 

7.Defilements in general are impossible without a temporarily 
existing defiled mind, thus antidotes to them would also be illogical in 
such a case. A mental consciousness cannot be considered the source 
of the basic defilement of assuming a self, since a mental consciousness 
may produce the antidotes to this conception. But this defiled mind 


630 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


may be entirely eliminated from the consciousness-series. 

8.It is the traces of the storehouse-consciousness that cause all 
consciousness, and all phenomena in general, to arise. 

15."Seed" is essentially a metaphor for a special power (Saktivisesa) 
within the "consciousness-series" which leads to the series' own 
transformation, and which is the result of a trace. It is because of the 
arising of these special powers that the storehouse-consciousness is 
called the cause of defiled, good, and neutral factors, because the 
storehouse-consciousness constitutes the seeds. 

Retribution is also to be explained as the development of seeds left 
by former good and bad decisions. 

29-30.Vasubandhu states here that the storehouse-consciousness is 
also a series of factors, but each moment leaves a trace in the next. But 
these traces themselves imply a store-consciousness, for all theories of 
traces that dispense with a store-consciousness are untenable. Some 
maintain that the awarenesses taint each other mutually. No, 
Vasubandhu replies, because there is no contact between different 
awarenesses, because these awarenesses are serially momentary. 
Furthermore, each of them has its own special support, object, and 
mental attention, and manifest themselves in totally different aspects. 
The Darstantikas maintain that the previous awareness-moment taints 
the succeeding factor, but, Vasubandhu replies, these two factors are 
never simultaneous. No previous factor taints the next. Two factors 
which are not simultaneous can of course not be in contact. Some say 
that because these awarenesses are all of the same kind, they can taint 
each other. No, Vasubandhu says, because, for instance, all sensory 
organs are of the same kind in being sentient materiality, but this does 
not mean that an auditory factor can taint a visual one. 

Only a Vaibhasika could consistently maintain that an already past 
factor can influence a present one! That a factor arises with its 
retributional force already intact is also untenable, since the 
attachment due to a visual impression does not arise simultaneously 
with the visual awareness factor but rather after it. Vasubandhu shows, 
through similar arguments regarding the nonpossibility of causality 
between a past factor and a present one, how the storehouse- 
consciousness is necessary for any explanation of traces, defilement, 
and purification. It might be asked whether, within a strict theory of 
momentariness, the storehouse-consciousness can itself account for 
tainting or retribution, since it also consists of factors, and if a previous 


MAHAYANASAMGRAHABHASYA 631 


factor cannot taint the next, the same problem seems to remain. But, 
as Asanga has said in Mahayanasamgraha I, 17, the awareness- 
moment and the storing of a seed in the storehouse-consciousness are 
simultaneous. The storehouse-consciousness being the series of traces, 
once the seed is deposited, the trace-series (also changing moment to 
moment) continues in the storehouse-consciousness. The arguments 
given here against the awarenesses tainting each other are still valid, 
because they cannot taint each other due to the lack of possibility of 
contact between them, because each of them has a separate support, 
object, and mental attention. Nor can two awarenesses of the same 
kind--even mental awarenesses--arise in the same moment, so contact 
between two mental awareness factors is also ruled out. 

31.Elaboration of the argument: Awareness at birth is already 
afflicted with all of the defilements of its sphere of existence (realm of 
desire, say), yet the previous life may have been in the immaterial 
realm. In other words, the first awareness of a new life in the realm of 
desire is already tainted with the defilements arising from defilements 
of the past, even when the directly antecedent life was of the 
immaterial realm. For an entire life, then, these defilement-series had 
to remain latent, and this is possible only with the existence of a 
storehouse-consciousness. 

32.When an awareness-factor antidotal to defilements arises, all the 
worldly awareness-factors, i.e., of the six awarenesses, are eliminated. 
Yet the seeds of their traces must remain, because the same kind of 
defilements may arise again at a future moment with all the 
associations they had in the past. The seeds of these defilement-traces 
cannot lie in the awareness-factor antidotal to defilements, since it is 
free of them by definition. Yet a defiled awareness-factor with the 
associations of past defilements may arise after such an awareness 
antidotal to the defilements, or at least after a series of awareness- 
factors antidotal to such defilements. Thus these traces, which by 
necessity imply a consciousness associated with them, can only be in 
the storehouse-consciousness during the duration of the series of 
awarenesses antidotal to the defilements. 

33-34.There is no possibility_of the arising of defilements linked 
with an awareness due to motivating dispositions without a store- 
consciousness. 

35. In the embryo, the six functioning awarenesses could not 
appropriate the material organs, because each of these awarenesses 


632 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


presupposes its material organ for its functioning. This shows that it 
cannot be awarenesses that appropriate all the material organs 
together. Furthermore, these awarenesses are extremely unstable, and 
disappear under one aspect after a moment, thus they could never be 
the awarenesses which gradually appropriate the material organs in an 
embryo. 

38.Saying that the series of traces of one life cannot transfer into 
another life is tantamount to saying that the conditions for the defiled 
awareness which arises at birth with associations from a past life 
would be impossible. 

40.Though a supramundane awareness destroys the series of other 
kinds of awarenesses, yet defiled awarenesses may arise again: 
without a storehouse-consciousness, there would be no seed for such 
awarenesses. 

50.The consciousness which is in the attainment of cessation can 
only be the store-consciousness, as only it can be exempt of 
identifications and feelings. The awareness which enters into the 
attainment still has feelings and identifications, and as it ceases before 
the attainment of cessation arises, it cannot account for psychic 
continuity. Besides, any other consciousnesses (besides the storehouse- 
consciousness) must have an object of consciousness.5”° 

52-54.The good roots in the attainment of cessation are not the 
good roots in the usual karmic sense, since the good roots which are 
themselves karmically good can arise only with contact with an object 
of consciousness, and there is no contact without feelings and 
identifications. Obviously, these good roots cannot be bad, either. 

A mental awareness is also impossible without contact, thus is also 
impossible as the consciousness in the attainment of cessation. Besides, 
would it be good, bad, or karmically neutral? The problems with 
assuming its goodness or badness have already been discussed. If it is 
neutral, is it related to bodily postures, related to artistic activity, 
related to magical creations, or the result of retribution? (Only these 
four categories of mental awareness are accepted as karmically 
indeterminate by the Vibhdsd and all who inspire themselves with the 
Vibhdasa.) Obviously none of the three first alternatives is possible, 
since in the attainment of cessation there can be no object of 
awareness relating to any of these. The only category of neutral 
awarenesses which remains is that of “consciousnesses which are the 
result of retribution". But only the storehouse-consciousness can be 


Fae CsA Re TO AIRC ECON oy ienemnnmtes ti iMHi. 


a 


MAHAYANASAMGRAHABHASYA 633 


neutral in this sense.°”” 

55.Turns the argument around to state that a nirvana without 
remainder of a noble one would be impossible in the case that an 
uninterrupted materiality-aggregate-series accounts for the attainment 
of cessation, since neither the materiality-series nor the awareness- 
series could in that case ever be severed. 

57.Explains in detail the passage, underlining especially that an 
antidote is the cause of the severance of a defilement. 

59.The storehouse-consciousness is the object of consciousness for 
the view of the self which is held by the defiled mind. 

62.From the good further good arises, from the bad further bad. 
Thus if the storehouse-consciousness were not unobstructed-neutral 
there would never be an end to samsara. 


CHAPTER TWO*%”8 


2."Perceptions of a body’, i.e., the five sense-organs. "Possessor of 
the body", i.e., the defiled mind. "An enjoyer", i.e., the mental 
consciousness. 

3.Defines the "constructed" as follows: "Whenever there is the 
appearance of a truth corresponding to an object which really does not 
exist." 

The delimitation of strictly divided objects of sense is a function of 
the constructed only. For in ultimate truth these distinctions are 
empty. This can be directly perceived in meditational states. This also 
explains why the memory of a past event never fully corresponds to the 
past event, and why it always arises with different nuances. The 
existence of totally mentally constructed contents of consciousness, 
which have no reference to an existing external object, is also 
demonstrated by memories, since the object they supposedly refer to 
is long past, and thus cannot be their object of consciousness in the 
present. 

9.Defilements arise precisely because the nonexistent has been 
taken for the existent, as, for example, a satisfaction anticipated which 
cannot be attained, or a view which does not correspond to any reality. 
Both of these phenomena would be impossible unless the mental 
consciousness had the capacity to construct another "reality" which is 
not identical with existent interdependent reality. 

12.This is also why all six types of awareness are considered to be 


634 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


part of the mental sense-field. But in order to coordinate these 
awarenesses and give them a continuity, there must also be a 
storehouse-consciousness. There could be no liberation at all if there 
were no abandonment of perverted views, and an abandonment of 
perversions is not possible unless there have been perversions 
previously to be abandoned. 

16.The constructed is that which is constructed by the mental 
consciousness only. Vasubandhu qualifies the constructed as having 
"the essential nature of having no essential nature". 

20-22.On constructions of distractions in the Bodhisattva-path, 
Vasubandhu says the antidote to these is the prajfaparamita. All 
differentiations considered in such distractions are annihilated by the 
realization of emptiness, i.e., by constructionfree knowledge. 

24.If the constructed essential nature is the manner in which the 
dependent appears, how can it be ascertained that it has no nature? If 
the dependent and the constructed were identical, even without a 
name, there would be attachment to a notion. But as a matter of fact, 
the notion of "pot" does not exist unless the name "pot" already exists. 
Now it may be said that the name "pot" is equivalent to the 
characteristic of a pot. But there is no one characteristic for a pot, 
while the name "pot" is single! This name and notion (the latter resting 
on characteristics seen, touched, etc.) cannot be the same. But it could 
be argued that it is the name which is dependent, and the object which 
is constructed. But in that case, through the dependent power of a 
name, the object would be constructed as one thing, and never as 
many. That is, one name would always equal one object, and one name 
could never be used for objects with different appearances. It may be 
argued that the characteristics of the name and the object are totally 
identical. But in that case, when there are different names for the same 
object, the objects themselves would have to be different, too. 
Furthermore, one name may have different meanings, and this is also 
impossible given the identity of name and notion. Ambiguity in 
language would be impossible if one name = one notion. 

Two problems arise in distinguising the constructed from the 
dependent. The first: "How can a factor which does not exist be 
apprehended?" (The constructed does not exist, since the perfected is 
the dependent without the constructed, so how is it that it constantly 
appears?) Reply: It is as in the case of a magical illusion, where an 
elephant is seen where no elephant exists. The second: "How can there 


MAHAYANASAMGRAHABHASYA 635 


be unpurified defilements?" (Defilements are constructed. If the 
constructed does not exist, defilements cannot exist either.) Reply: It 
is as in the case of space, which is perfectly pure by nature, but which 
is said to be disturbed by fog, etc. When the fog disappears, it is said 
that space has been cleared, but actually space was totally clear from 
the beginning. It is the same for all factors. They are pure by nature, 
but when adventitious obstructions are removed, it is said that they are 
purified. 

25.Why is it said that without the dependent the perfected cannot 
exist, and if the dependent and the perfected do not exist, there can be 
neither defilement nor purification? Because without defilements (the 
dependent) there cannot be purification (the perfected) .5” 

27.The images are those given by Asanga in II, 26. If it is asked, 
"How can the nonexistent be a sense-object?", the answer is: Just asa 
magical creation is a sense-object. If it is asked, "If awareness and 
accompanying factors have no objects, how can they arise?", the 
answer is: Just as in a mirage, when there is no water, water is seen. If 
itis asked, "In the absence of objects, how can there be satisfying and 
frustrating experiences?", the answer is: Just as in a dream there may 
be satisfying and frustrating experiences. If it is asked, "In the absence 
of any object, how can good and bad actions produce a satisfying or 
frustrating karmic result?", the answer is: Just as a reflection is seen 
with various colors, when actually it does not have various colors. If it 
is asked, "How, in the absence of objects, can diverse awarenesses 
arise?", the answer is: Just as various flashes may arise in the play of 
shadows, which are seen even though they correspond to nothing. If 
it is asked, "How can there be practical dealings with a variety of things 
without any objects existing?", the answer is: Just as an echo is not an 
independent sound, and yet is heard as one, just so vain ways of 
speaking may be heard but yet correspond to nothing. If it is asked, 
"Without objects, how can there be images seen in meditation?’, the 
answer is: Just as a moon is seen in the water when there is no moon 
there. If it is asked, "Without objects, how can Bodhisattvas take on 
births at will for the sake of sentient beings?", the answer is: Just as a 
transformation is not real in itself, but results in something perceived 
as different. 

There is also another reason for these eight images. The image of a 
magical creation serves to contradict the idea that the six internal 
sense-fields exist. The image of the mirage serves to contradict the idea 


636 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


that an insentient universe exists. The image of the dream serves to 
contradict the idea that karmic results of bodily action truly exist. The 
image of an echo serves to contradict the idea that karmic results of 
vocal action truly exist. The image of the flash serves to contradict the 
idea that karmic results of nonmeditative mental actions exist. The 
image of the moon in the water serves to contradict the idea that the 
karmic results of meditative mental action exist. The image of a 
transformation serves to contradict the idea that karmic results due to 
hearing the dharma truly exist. 

28-29,.Vasubandhu states that the Buddha could make the 
statement quoted by Asaniga because there is no difference between 
nirvana and samsara, and because "nirvana" and "samsara" are totally 
mentally constructed concepts. Without one, the other cannot be 
conceived. One can say that the constructed is the defiled and the 
perfected the purified, but the dependent partakes of both. It is just 
like a vein of gold in a gold mine, where the gold and dirt are mixed. 
The process of separating the gold from the dirt by fire is like the 
separation of the perfected from the defiled by constructionfree 
knowledge. 

30.Because factors are nonexistent, there are no factors, but 
because factors appear with various aspects, there are not no factors. 
So, since there are neither factors nor the absence of factors, there is 
the nonduality of factor and absence of factor. On the one hand factors 
don't exist, i.e., in their essential nature; on the other hand they do 
exist because they are manifest. Thus they are both existent and 
nonexistent. The dependent partakes of both these aspects: thus one 
can say that it too is both existent and nonexistent. Factors do not exist 
as they appear, and yet they do not not exist, because of their 
appearance. Why is it said that factors have no essential nature? 
Because they don't exist of themselves, but arise dependent on 
conditions; because once they have ceased, they can never arise again; 
because they don't last but a moment--these three reasons are accepted 
in Hinayana also. But then there are the two other reasons accepted 
only by Mahayana: Because they are not such as they are believed to 
be, and because they do not exist with their constructed nature as 
expressed in words. Since factors have no essential nature it follows 
that they cannot arise at all. For that which has no essential nature 
cannot arise, and that which does not arise cannot cease, and that 
which neither arises nor ceases is calm from the beginning and 


MAHAYANASAMGRAHABHASYA 637 


liberated by nature. These various conclusions arise gradually, i.e., 
each following one dependent on the preceding one. 


CHAPTER THREE 


1.Merit and knowledge are the two main aspects of the Bodhisattva- 
path. In the initial acquiring of merit, the strengths of the root-cause 
(enlightenment), of good friends, of mental attention and one's 
introduction to dharma are important. By "strength in mental 
attention", resolve in Mahayana is meant. Once this resolve has arisen, 
the increasing of the good roots in the Mahayana sense may begin. 

3.First, an interest in Mahayana may be aroused through mental 
discourses with initial and subsequent discursive thought. But finally 
this interest will take the practitioner beyond mental discourse, and 
beyond mental application and discursive thought. 

6.The mental attention of Bodhisattvas which is not shared by 
disciples and self-enlightened ones is: Regarding phenomena as 
magical creations, dreams, etc., factors neither arise nor perish, 
because they have no essential nature; thus there is no attachment to 
any factors, and no more adhesion to any names, words, or doctrines. 

7.Four investigations and four right comprehensions enter into this 
process: First one investigates the fact that the essential natures and 
specifications attributed to names and factors are only designations, 
because there is no object which exists. Then, one knows rightly that 
all this is absolutely nonexistent. At the moment of discovery there is 
an investigation; once the investigation is completed, the fourfold right 
comprehension is attained. The four investigations are seeing that 
name is only a mental fiction (prapafica), seeing that "object" is only 


‘a mental fiction, seeing that the own-being attributed to name and 


object is mental fiction, seeing that the differentiations attributed to 
name and object are mental fictions. These result in the four 
comprehensions: knowing that name is a mental fiction, etc. 
Investigation means right sustained thought, right knowledge, the 
nonapprehension of any object. 

10.The awareness of sameness towards all sentient beings means 
that one considers all sentient beings equal to oneself, and one desires 
the ending of all their frustrations as much as one desires the end of 
one's own frustrations. 

13.Meditation, after the first state, means in itself already a 


638 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


knowledge without objects, and from this comes the knowledge of the 
selflessness of all factors. Vasubandhu states clearly that the store- 
consciousness is not only the cause of traces of defiled factors, but also 
of the factors of complete purification. 

14.Supramundane knowledge is constructionfree knowledge. But 
the knowledge directly subsequent to this knowledge without 
constructions is again a knowledge of determinations. It cannot be 
called worldly, because it is impregnated by the impressions of 
constructionfree knowledge. It cannot be called supramundane, 
because it again uses concepts. 

15-17.There is a total identity between the so-called apprehender 
(alambaka) and that which is apprehended (alambya). Everything is 
thus included in emptiness. 

There is no possibility of any supporting object without something 
being constructed. Thus, when the nonbeing of objects is realized, itis 
realized that no constructible object exists, and so that not even the act 
of apprehension exists. 


202. VASUBANDHU, Trimsikakarika 
Summary by Stefan Anacker 


This famous work expands classical Abhidharma consciousness- 
theories into the Yogacara consciousness-theory and, more 
importantly, into the idea of three "essential natures" (svabhava) in 
reality. Combined with 203.Vimsatika the pair is known as 
Vijhaptimatratasiddhi. Both works have been edited and translated 
many times. 

("ET" references here are to K.N. Chatterjee*®°) 


1.(ET27-29) "Self" and "factors" are both metaphors and develop in 
many different ways. All these take place in the transformation of 
consciousness only. 

2.(ET30) The kinds of maturation of mind are the store- 
consciousness, the thinking consciousness (i.e., the mind), and the 
Maturations (as_ six sensory consciousnesses). The store or 
maturational consciousness has all the "seeds" of experience. 

3.(ET31-32) Though itis not fully conscious, it is always connected 


TRIMSIKA 639 


with subliminal contacts, mental attentions, feelings, identifications 
and volitions. 

4.(ET46-49) Its feelings are equanimous: it is unobstructed and 
ethically neutral. 

5.(ET49-50) Its devolvement takes place in a perfected being (i.e., 
the removal of consciousness from the hold of traces is possible). 

Dependent on this store-consciousness, and having it as its object of 
consciousness, is mind, the ego-sense, 

6.(ET53-54) which is always connected with the view of self, self- 
delusion and self-affection. 

7.(ETSS-57) But it is also totally removable, as it doesn't exist in the 
state of perfection, the cessation-trance, or in the supramundane path. 

8.(ETS9) The third transformation is to the six kinds of sense- 
objects, which can be either good, bad, or neutral. 

9.(ET60) They are always connected with the pervasive things: 
contacts, mental attentions, feelings, identifications, and volitions. 
Sometimes they are connected with good factors associated with 
awareness, with defilements, and with afflictions. 

11-14.(ET61-80) The enumeration of these accompanying mental 
factors is exactly the same as in 196.Paricaskandhaka 

15.(ET96) These consciousnesses may all arise together, or not. 

16.(ET99) A mental consciousness follows on instances of other 
consciousnesses except in the nonidentifying consciousnesses, the 
attainment of cessation, in torpor, fainting, or in a state without 
awareness. 

17.(ET102) This transformation of consciousness is a conceptual 
construction, and as such does not really exist--so everything is 
consciousness-only. (All discriminations are emptied in the perfected 
state.) 

18.(ET105) The storehouse-consciousness is only all the seeds. 

19.(ET107) Proclivities cause other maturations of seeds to occur, 
when the former maturation has been exhausted. 

20.(ET116) Whatever is discriminated is just a constructed essential 
nature and doesn't really exist. 

21.(ET117-118) The dependent is what underlies these 
constructions, and the perfected is the dependent's being separated 
from the constructed. 

22.(ET119-121) Thus the dependent and the perfected are neither 
exactly the same nor different. 


640 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


23.(ET122) The three kinds of essential nature (constructed, 
dependent, and perfected) are brought up only because of a three-fold 
absence of essential nature. 

24.(ET123) The constructed is without essential nature through its 
character itself; the dependent is without essential nature because of 
its nonindependence; and the perfected is the absence of essential 
nature. 

25.(ET123-125) The perfected is the highest; it is suchness, 
consciousness-only. 

26.(ET126) As long as manifestation-only is not realized, the 
proclivities of dual apprehension won't come to an end. 

27.(ET128) This is even true for the consciousness that "All is 
consciousness-only", because this also involves an awareness and an 
attempt to make something stand still. 

28.(ET129) When consciousness does not apprehend any object of 
consciousness, it's in consciousness-only. 

29.(ET130) But accordingly this state is also without awareness 
(since if no object is apprehended there is no consciousness, either): it 
is supramundane knowledge, revolution at the basis, and the ending 
of depravity. 

30.(ET131) It is the dharmadhatu and the dharmakaya of the 
Buddha. 


203. VASUBANDHU, VimsSatika and Vrtti thereon 
Summary by Stefan Anacker 


"E" references are to the edition by Sylvain Levi.’ "I" references are 
to the translation by Stefan Anacker.**? There are numerous other 
editions and translations. 

This is a famous work, but as often misinterpreted as not. It has 
been used as authoritative source for contradictory opinions none of 
which are in the text itself. 


1.(E1-2; T161) All this is consciousness-only (vijfiaptimatra), just 
as there may be the seeing of nonexistent nets of hair by someone 
suffering from an optical disorder. 

2.(E1-2; T161-162) Objection: Why in that case do manifestations 


VIMSATIKA 641 


of certain kinds of visibles arise only in certain places, and not 
everywhere, and only at certain times, and not all the time? Why is it 
that these manifestations arise for all moment-series that are in the 
same place, and not just for some of them? The hair, etc., seen by 
someone suffering from an optical disorder does not perform the 
functions of hair, etc., whereas it is not the case that other hair, etc., 
don't perform them. 

3.(E2; T162) Reply: It is as in a dream. In a dream, even without 
there being an external object, certain things appear only in certain 
places and times. And all ghosts will see the same things, even though 
others won't see them. 

4.(E2; T162-163) An activity may be performed in a dream, such as 
when a man has a sexual dream and semen is released. In hellish 
exepriences all the criteria mentioned by the opponent are manifested, 
and yet there are no external objects corresponding to these 
experiences. Those having hellish experiences see hell-guardians, etc., 
though these guardians are really nonexistent. 

Opponent: What do you mean, they're nonexistent? 

Reply: Because they are illogical. The guardians would have been 
experiencing hellish frustrations themselves, if they were real. 

Opponent: But there are animals in a heaven-state. 

5.(E4-5; T164) Reply: Yes, but they are there experiencing 
retribution for past actions bringing pleasure to their environment, 
whereas the hell-guardians don't experience hellish frustration 
themselves. 

6.(E4; T164) Opponent: Maybe special material elements arise, 
which are interpreted by the one in the hell-state as hell-guardians. 

Reply: It is more logical merely to assume a transformation of 
awareness. 

7.(E5; T164-165) Since traces arising from actions are different 
from the action's results and yet are not material, why do you say that 
the retributions resulting therefrom are something material and not 
merely awarenesses? 

8.(E5; T165) Opponent: If there were no external objects of 
consciousness, sensings of color, etc., would not have been spoken of 
by the Buddha. 

Reply: The Buddha spoke of these sensings only to instruct those 
being introduced to dharma, just as he spoke of magical beings 
(upapdadukasattva),**? which do not really exist. 


642 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


9.(ES-6; T165-166) A "sensing of color" is where manifestation of 
something seemingly visible arises from its appropriate seed. 

10.(E6; T166-167) Through consciousness-only one can understand 
the selflessness of the person, because it can be seen that there is not 
any one seer, etc. And through it one can also understand the 
selflessness of factors, because one understands that consciousness- 
only makes appearances of visibles} etc., arise, but that there is no 
experienced factor with the characteristic marks of visibles, etc. 

Opponent: But if there isn't any factor in any way whatsoever, then 
consciousness-only also isn't. 

Reply: Butit's not that there isn't any factor in any way whatsoever. 
It's rather that the constructed "selves" of factors do not exist. 
Vasubandhu leaves the possibility open for an ineffable self 
(anabhilapyatman), which is the scope of Buddhas. Besides, 
consciousness-only must itself be self-dissolving, otherwise 
consciousness-only would be a real object. 

11.(E6-7; T167) An object can be neither one thing nor several 
things. If it were a unity, it would have to be like the composite whole 
constructed by the Vaisesikas. It cannot be plural, either, because 
atoms can't be apprehended singly . 

12.(E7; T167-168) An atom, in fact, can't be demonstrated either, 
because by the simultaneous contact with, say, six elements the atom 
comes to have six parts, and is thus no longer an atom. If it is 
maintained that the locus of each single atom is the locus of all six 
elements, then the molecule would be only one atom, because of the 
mutual exclusion of occupants of a locus. 

Vaibhasika: It's only when atoms are in a molecular state that they 
can join together. 

13.(E7; T168) Reply: But atoms can't join together to form 
molecules unless they have parts which contact each other. And if they 
have parts they're not atoms. 

14.(E7-8; T168-169) Even the division of directional dimensions 
which is necessary to assuming the contact of atoms becomes 
impossible, because what has such divisions is no unity. Itis useless to 
speak of molecular contact if individual atoms can't come into contact. 

15.(E8; T169-170) The unity of objects is obviously absurd, because 
there could be no simultaneously grasping one thing and failing to 
grasp another, and there would be no reason for subtle water-creatures 
Not to see things. 


VIMSATIKA 643 


Since visibles cannot be reduced to atoms, they are not real sense- 
fields, and thus consciousness-only is demonstrated. 

16.(E8-9; T171-172) There are three instruments of knowledge 
(perception, inference, appeal to reliable authority). Of these, 
perception is the most weighty. But since there is no external object 
there is no perception. When a perceptual awareness arises in the form 
of "I perceive it" the object is already not seen, because of 
momentariness. Thus that awareness is not a perception. 

17.(E9; T171-172) Opponent: Nothing which hasn't been 
experienced by other awarenesses is remembered by the mental 
consciousness, so perception still occurs in this way. 

Reply: The remembering of an experienced object isn't 
demonstrated either. Perceptions arise without an external object, and 
memories arise from these perceptions. 

Opponent: If, even when one is awake, perception has objects which 
don't exist, as in a dream, then people would understand their 
nonexistence as obvious. 

Reply: No, because people who are asleep don't know that the visual 
objects they see are only a dream. In the same way, people realize the 
nonexistence of external objects only upon gaining constructionfree 
supramundane knowledge, aclear, subsequently-attained knowledge. 

18.(E9; T172-173) Opponent: How can there be any certainty in 
that case? 

Reply: One awareness influences the next, and it is only the 
consistency of these influences which: allow for "certainty". 

Opponent: Why is there not an equal retribution for bad volitions in 
adream? 

Reply: Because awareness is affected by sleepiness in a dream. 

19.(E9-10; T173) Opponent: In that case, there can be no bodily or 
vocal action. 

Reply: Even death may result from the special perceptions of 
another, as when a seer destroys through his mental power. 

20.(E10; T172-174) If this were not so, why would mental harm 
have been called a great offence? 

21.(E10-11; T174) Opponent: Do those who know the awarenesses 
of others really know them, then? 

Reply: Yes, they do, but their knowledge is not like their knowledge 
of an object. It is in fact the removal of the idea of "object" and "subject" 
which makes such empathic perception, and the knowledge of 


644 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Buddhas, possible (i.e., the appearance of an "object" always implies 
the presence of an appearance which is abandoned in these two kinds 
of awareness). Thus these "knowledges" are really "nonknowledges", 
because a specific object is not known within them. 

22.(E11; T175) Consciousness-only cannot be discussed in all its 
aspects, because it is beyond the scope of awareness, and is known 
entirely only by Buddhas. 


204. VASUBANDHU, Trisvabhavanirdesa 
Summary by Stefan Anacker 


This may be Vasubandhu's last work. It seems as if the conclusion 
of the VimSatika and the Trimsikd lead to the insights of this text. But 
it is nonetheless a startling one, inasmuch as the distinctions between 
the three natures are subtly undermined, whereas at the same time 
their successive development is maintained. It is a work fundamentally 
Siinyavadin in inspiration, though the Abhidharmika's interest in 
psychological processes is maintained. 

"E" references are to the edition by Louis de la Vallée Poussin.> "T" 
references are to Stefan Anacker's translation.5* 


1-2.(E154; T291) That which appears is the dependent, "how it 
appears" is the constructed. The former develops subject to conditions; 
the latter is construction-only. 

3.(E143; T291) The perfected is the constant absence of "how it 
appears" in that which appears. 

4.(E154; 291) What appears? A construction of what was not. 
How does it appear? Through dualities. But nonduality is the 
perfected. 

5.(E154; T291) What is a construction of what was not? An 
awareness by which the dependent becomes constructed, in such a 
way that the object which it constructs cannot be completely found in 
that way. 

6.(E154; T291) This awareness may be either the store- 
consciousness or the functioning consciousness of seven kinds (i.e., the 
SIX sensory awareness and the mind or ego-sense). 

7.(E154; T292) The store-consciousness is called "citta" because it 


TRISVABHAVANIRDESA 645 


becomes accumulated (citatvat); functioning consciousnesses are 
"citta" because they evolve various (citra) aspects. 

8.(E154; T292) The construction of what was not is of three kinds: 
maturational, having signs, and flashing appearances. 

9.(E154; T292) Maturational is the storehouse-consciousness: the 
others are the functioning consciousnesses, because they always 
function as cognitions of "seen" and "seeing" ("heard" and "hearing", 
etc.). 

10-11.(E154; T292) The constructed is perceived as existent, butit 
is nonbeing; thus it has both an existent and nonexistent character. 

12.('E154; T292) The dependent exists, but not as it appears, so it 
also has an existent and nonexistent character. 

13.(E155;T292) The perfected exists because of nonduality, and is 
only the nonbeing of "two", so it also has an existent and nonexistent 
character. 

14.(E155; T292-293) Because the constructed always involves at 
least the duality of object apprehended and subject apprehender, and 
because this duality is nonexistent, the constructed consists of duality- 
and-unity. 

15.(E155; T293) Because the dependent appears with there being 
a duality, but this duality is only construction, the dependent also 
consists of duality-and-unity. 

16.(E155; T293) Because the perfected is the essential nature of the 
two beings, and because it is the one essential nature of nonduality, 
the perfected also consists of duality-and-unity. 

17.(E155; T293) The afflictions-together®’ are constructed and 
dependent. Purification is the perfected. 

18.(E155; T293) Because the constructed is the essential nature of 
a nonexistent duality, and because the perfected is the essential nature 
of the nonbeing of that duality, the constructed and the perfected are 
indistinguishable. 

19.(E155; T293) Because the perfected is the essential nature of 
nonduality, and because the constructed is the essential nature of the 
nonbeing of duality, the perfected and the constructed are 
indistinguishable. 

20.(E155; T293) Because the dependent is nonexistent as it 
appears, and the perfected is the essential nature of this nonexistence, 
the perfected and the dependent are indistinguishable. 

21.(E155; T293-294) Because the perfected is the essential nature 


646 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of a nonexistent duality, and the dependent has not essential nature as 
it appears, the dependent and the perfected are indistinguishable. 
22.(E155; T293) But there is a difference in the occurrence of their 
arising. 
23.(E155; T294) The constructed constitutes practical affairs, and 
that which engages in practical affairs is the dependent. The perfected 
is the severance of the dependent from practical affairs. 
24.(E155; T293) First there is the dependent, and only then can 
construction-only, nonexistent duality, arise. Only after the processes 
of construction can their devolvement, i-e., the perfected, arise. 
25.(E155; T294) Thus the perfected is said to both exist and not 
exist. (It exists inasmuch as it is the dependent without the 
constructed; it does not exist inasmuch as it is the nonbeing of any 
duality.) 
26.(E156; T294) These three essential natures are ungraspable, 
because of the constructed's simple nonbeing, the dependent's 
nonbeing in the manner in which it appears, and the perfected being 
the essential nature of that nonbeing. 
27.(E156; T294) A magical creation produced by mantras may 
appear like an elephant, but this is only an appearance, and there is no 
elephant there at all. 
28.(E156; T294) The constructed is like the elephant, the 
dependent is like its appearance, and the perfected is like the nonbeing 
of the elephant there. 
29.(E156; T294) The construction of what was not appears in the 
same way, because of duality. There is no duality there at all: there is 
only the appearance of duality there. 
30.(E156; T294) The storehouse-consciousness is like the mantra 
which sets the magical creation going, suchness is like the pieces of 
wood the magician has in front of him and which he makes appear like 
an elephant, construction is like the elephant's appearance, and duality 
is like the elephant itself.5°” 
31-32.(E156; T295) in a true penetration of this phenomenon, 
there is, simultaneously, the ascertainment of the constructed (which 
leads to its dissolving), the abandoning of the dependent as 
constructing, and the realization of the perfected. The ascertainment 
of the constructed is its nonapprehension, the abandonment of the 
dependent as constructing is its nonappearance, and the realization of 
the perfected is its signless apprehension. 


TRISVABHAVANIRDESA 647 


33.(E156; T295) With the nonapprehension of duality the 
appearance of duality vanishes, and with this disappearance the 
perfected is understood. 

34.(E156; T295) It's just as when the apprehension of the elephant, 
its appearances disappearance, and the apprehension of the wood take 
place simultaneously. ‘ : ; 

35.(E156; T295) Because there are contradictory views in relation 
to the same moment, because of the intellect's seeing without a true 
object, because of the different development of the three kinds of 
knowledge (constructed, dependent, and perfected, cf. 22-25), and 
because, without all this, the attainment of liberation would come 
without effort, 

36.(E156; T295) there is the nonapprehension of the knowable, 
because it is awareness-only, and through this nonapprehension ofa 
knowable object there is the nonapprehension of awareness itself. 
(Without the apprehension of a knowable object there is no awareness 
either.**) 

37.(E156; T295) Through the nonapprehension of any duality, 
there is the apprehension of the dharmadhatu, and through this, the 
apprehension of psychic mastery. 

38.(E157; T295-296) With psychic mastery attained, and through 
perfecting both one's own and others' aims, the enlightenment which 
has no higher is attained. 


205. VASUBANDHU, Bodhicittotpadastitra(Sastra) 
Summary by Bhadanta Santi Bhiksu 


This work, which as translated into Chinese by Kumarajiva in the 
fifth century (Nanjio 1218), is ascribed to Vasubandhu, though no one 
seems very convinced by the ascription. It has been reconstructed into 
Sanskrit by Bhadanta Santi Bhiksu,* with an English introduction 
from which we provide excerpts. 


“This treatise contains twelve chapters...the first deals with 
"adhyesana" after propounding the greatness of Bodhicittotpada, an 
inspiration to cultivate Bodhicitta. The title of the second chapter is 
Bodhicittotpada, in which a reference to the helpful means of 


648 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Bodhicittotpada has been made. The third chapter is called 
Pranidhana, in which aspirations (pranidhdna) for the attainment of 
Bodhi have been described. From chapters four to nine Dana, Sila, 
Ksanti, Virya, Dhyana and Prajfaparamitas respectively have been 
expounded. In chapters ten and eleven, Siinyavada has been treated. 
The whole of the eleventh chapter appears to be some Siitra...The first 
and the twelfth chapters also appear to be part of Siitras..." (p. ii) 

"Acarya Vasubandhu...explains Bodhicitta with the help of similes 
and inferences: ‘In the beginning when the great ocean manifests itself, 
it should be known that it is the store of all kinds of jewels, ordinary, 
medium and the best; valuable invaluable ‘wishing stones’ (cintamani) 
and the like; because these precious stones are found in the oceans. 
The Cittotpdda of Bodhisattva is also like this. When, in the beginning, 
Bodhicitta is born, then, it should be known that it is the store from 
which originate gods, men, Sravakas, pratye kabuddhas, Bodhisattvas, 
all kusaladharmas, all moral actions, meditation and Praja (1, 5)." (p. 
v) 

"How to cultivate Bodhicitta and why? This question has been 
answered in the first, second and the third chapters. Just as this earth 
provides shelter to all creation irrespective of their good or bad nature, 
so also Bodhicitta provides refuge to all beings (1, 6). Just as the world 
of living beings knows no end, so also there is no end to the cultivation 
of Bodhicitta (I, 7).. .." (p. vii) 

"How is Bodhicitta cultivated?...In the second chapter, (some basic) 
causes from which the Bodhicitta springs forth are enumerated. Here, 
it should be borne in mind that the meaning of Bodhicittotpatti 
according to the Mahayana school is simply the awakening of the 
dormant Bodhicitta. Except in the case of the few lowliest sinners, the 
Bodhicitta does remain latent in all beings in its unconscious state. 
When the Bodhicitta is awakened due to the cultivation of its causes 
and essentials, the individual no more remains an ordinary individual. 
He becomes Bodhisattva. What the Bodhisattva aspires [to] has been 
treated in the third chapter. Among his aspirations, the principal one 
is that he may sacrifice his wealth and body for the sake of other 
beings..." (p. viii) 

"Bodhi is attained through six paramitds. The Acarya has described 
the paramita in a very graphic manner. First the Bodhisattva practises 
the paramita of dana and gives up every thing that belongs to him. This 
is sarvadana, sacrifice...(4.6). Sarvadana implies that a donor believes 





BODHICITTOTPADA 649 


that there is nothing which he cannot give, and such a dana only is the 
perfection of dana-paramita..." (p. ix) 

"While describing the paramita of conduct (Silaparamita) it has 
been remarked that the conduct of a Bodhisatva is extra-ordinary 
conduct. It can neither be compared with the conduct of an Arhat nor 
with that of a Pratyekabuddha. On account of its extra-ordinary 
nature, the practice of such a conduct is called the practice of good 
(kusala or sadhu) conduct; because by means of such a conduct it 
makes all the beings gainers (5.8)." (p. ix) 

"So far about the development of conduct of a Bodhisattva. The 
preliminary conduct is a fear of even the most insignificant sin (5.1). 
The practice for the conduct of a Bodhisattva is for the well-being of all 
living beings. He never aspires as a fruit of the practice of conduct to 
live himself in a better world (5.10). While describing the paramita of 
forgiveness, the unparalleled ideal of a Bodhisattva, it has been said 
that if anybody indulges in abuses or violence he should be forgiven as 
a madman. For self-consolation it should be taken as the result of one's 
actions in a previous birth (6.67). Describing the paramita of virya, it 
has been said that the preliminary stage of virya of a Bodhisattva is 
that which never retreats from its aim. But in its developed form, virya 
is boundless. Very mysterious things have been told about the 
paramita of meditation. Only Yogins can understand them. But 
meditation has a use for the common beings also. While practising 
meditation a Bodhisattva wandering in the world is not attached to it. 
Thus by meditation his mind becomes calm and steady. (8.9) Even this 
much good resulting from meditation is not negligible. For a mystic, 
meditation is the means for attaining all kinds of divine powers. From 
it are produced ‘divine ear' and ‘divine eye’, with which we can hear 
sounds far off and also can perceive things far off. By the divine powers 
we can also know the thoughts in others' minds, recollect past lives and 
can perform many more wonders (8.10)." (pp. ix-x) 


SANGHABHADRA 


In the introductory comments on Vasubandhu (p. 339 above) the 
name of Vasubandhu's rival Saighabhadra appears. The account given 
there provides Stefan Anacker's reconstruction of Vasubandhu's life 
from the traditional stories reported by Hsiiang-tsang, Paramartha and 


650 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Bu-ston. In fact, however, the three accounts differ in many respects. 
Collett Cox remarks: "All three versions agree that Sanghabhadra was 
a native of Kasmira while Vasubandhu was not, that both Vasubandhu 
and Sanghabhadra were knowledgeable in Abhidharma, that 
Vasubandhu composed a work, which was, at least in part, critical of 
the Vibhasd, and that Sanghabhadra wrote a refutation of 
Vasubandhu's work."°° 

"Though the primary object of Saighabhadra’s criticism in the 
*Nyayanusara is Vasubandhu's AbhidharmakoSabhasya, others such 
as the Darstantika or Sautrantika master, Sthavira, figure significantly 
among his opponents. Thus, the *Nyayanusdara is not simply a 
refutation of the AbhidharmakoSabhasya, but rather is a broad-based 
attempt to defend Kasmira Sarvastivada-Vaibhasika doctrine against 
the objections of all opponents. Though Sanghabhadra's 
interpretations are generally consistent with the Sarvastivada- 
Vaibhasika positions in response to them, Sanghabhadra's treatment 
of the conditioned forces dissociated from thought offers several key 
examples of his innovations...In methods of argumentation also, 
Sanghabhadra's *Nyayanusara, though influenced by the 
Abhidharmakosabhdasya, represents a distinct advance over previous 
Abhidharma texts. For these reasons, Sanghabhadra's works mark a 
turning pointin the developmentof Sarvastivada-Vaibhasika thought, 
as a result, Sanghabhadra is credited as the inaugurator of the so- 
called 'neo-Vaibhasika’ period."**! 


206.SANGHABHADRA, Nyayanusara 


This vast work is not available in Sanskrit or Tibetan. Only Hsiiang- 
tsang's translation is extant. Some of the original Sanskrit has been 
preserved in citations in Sthiramati's, Pimavardhana's and Yasomitra's 
commentaries and in Kamalaégila's Tattvasamgrahaparijika. The title 
*Nyayanusara is a reconstruction. The work is three times the length 
of Vasubandhu's Abhidharmakosabhasya. 

There is no complete translation into any Western language. It has 
been translated into Japanese by Chizan Anakuma in Kik. Bidombu, 
volumes 27-30. Louis de la Vallée Poussin has rendered a few passages 
into French, and some other passages have been translated into 
English by various writers (indicated in footnotes to certain sections 


NYAYANUSARA 651 


below). The most extensive inroads to date on this material comes in 
Collett Cox's dissertation.5” 

The work is an extended commentary on and critique of 
174.Vasubandhu's Abhidharmakosabhasya. The summary provided 
here has been numbered in keeping with our summary of the Kosa 
earlier in this Volume, the numbers of which correspond to those of 
Vasubandhu's siitras. Only the first two Chapters are summarized 
here. 

"E" references are to the Chinese text (T. 1562), translated by 
Hstian-tsang. "C" references are to the Cox translation cited above. 


Summary by Collett Cox 
CHAPTER ONE 


1.(E329a) Those who write treatises inevitably belong to a 
particular school. Vasubandhu begins his treatise with praises of the 
Buddha as the founder of his school, and thereby distinguishes him 
from false teachers. 

2.(E329a) "“Abhidharma" means pure wisdom, that is, 
noncontaminating investigation of factors. When one has seen the 
characteristics of all factors through this pure wisdom, one is no longer 
deluded. Abhidharma also includes those noncontaminating 
awarenesses, accompanying mental factors, and dissociated factors 
that occur with wisdom. 

3.(E329c) Apart from this investigation of factors there is no 
method of extinguishing defilements through which frustration is 
produced and the world is led through the cycle of rebirth. Despite 
Vasubandhu's skepticism, the Abhidharma definitely represents the 
teaching of the Buddha himself. Granted, sectarian differences are 
evident in the Abhidharma collections belonging to different schools, 
but this is true also of the collection of discourses, which no Buddhist 
would deny is the teaching of the Buddha. 

4-6.(E330c) In general, factors are of two types: those that are 
contaminating and those that are noncontaminating. All conditioned 
factors, with the exception of those classified under the fourth noble 
truth of the path, are contaminating because defilements adhere to 
them. These defilements, such as the view of belief in the existence of 
self, are "contaminating" because they cause defiled states of mind to 


652 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


flow forth. These contaminating and conditioned factors are also 
referred to as the five grasping aggregates. Quotations from scripture 
and arguments can be offered (1) to establish the character of factors 
that are contaminating or noncontaminating, and (2) to disprove the 
Darstantika thesis that insentient material form and the body of a 
practitioner of the noble path are both noncontaminating. 

Noncontaminating factors include those classified under the truth 
of the path, that is, the five aggregates that are without defilements as 
well as the three unconditioned factors. These three are (1) space, 
whose nature is nonobstruction because it neither obstructs material 
form nor is obstructed by it; (2) cessation calculatedly sought through 
contemplation of the four noble truths, the nature of which is 
disjunction from a defilement attained through a particular type of 
wisdom, each defilement to be eradicated being abandoned through 
a separate cessation; (3) cessation uncalculatedly sought through the 
obstruction of the arising of future factors by which they remain 
forever in the future. For example, when occupied with one sense 
object, perceptual consciousness of other present sense objects is 
obstructed; those sense objects pass away without their corresponding 
perceptual consciousness ever arising. 

7.(E332c) Conditioned factors are defined as the five aggregates of 
material form, feeling, identification, traces, and perceptual 
consciousness. They are also defined as the time periods, the 
foundations of discourse, and so on. These factors are conditioned 
because they arise due to a collocation of conditions. Future factors 
that have not yet arisen, and even those that will not arise, can still be 
said to be conditioned because they are of the same category as those 
present or past factors that have already arisen. Factors can also be 
classified in terms of twelve sense bases, including the six sense organs 
and their six corresponding objects, or in terms of eighteen elements, 
including the six sense organs, the six objects, and their six 
corresponding types of perceptual consciousness. 

8.(E333a) Contaminating conditioned factors are defined as the five 
grasping aggregates because they are both produced by grasping and 
produce grasping. The contaminating factors are also defined as 
frustration, the origin of frustration, and so on. 

9.(E333b) The material aggregate includes the five externally 
directed sense-organs, their five respective objects, and unmanifest 
form. This unmanifest form, though classified within the material 


NYAYANUSARA 653 


aggregate, is perceived only by the mind and, therefore, is included in 
the mental sense basis. The five externally directed sense-organs are 
composed of a subtle type of matter. 

10.(E333c) Material form, the object of the visual sense-organ, is of 
two varieties--color and shape--with twelve varieties of color and eight 
of shape. Though both color and shape can be observed in most 
varieties of material form, this does not mean that one entity has two 
essential natures; rather, both color and shape have material form as 
their essential nature. 

Vasubandhu in the Abhidharmakoga enumerates eight varieties of 
sound, including pleasant and unpleasant varieties of the following 
four types: those that are caused by the four great elements that are 
either appropriated by sentient beings or unappropriated, and those 
that are indicative of sentient beings or not. However, the first two 
categories of the appropriated and unappropriated encompass all 
varieties of sound. 

There are six varieties of flavors and four varieties of odors. 

Tangibles are of eleven varieties: the four great elements and seven 
derivative forms of matter including smoothness, roughness, 
heaviness, lightness, cold, hunger, and thirst. Each of these derivative 
types of material form results from a predominance of one of the four 
fundamental material elements. 

11.(E335a) Vasubandhu defines unmanifest form as that series of 
good or bad factors which is dependent upon the four great elements, 
found even in those beings whose successive thoughts are of a different 
moral quality, or in those who are temporarily without thought. 
However, unmanifest form should not be defined as a series. It is that 
material form which lacks resistance, which is morally determined as 
good or bad, and is found even in thoughts of differing moral quality, 
or in those who have passed beyond thought. 

12.(E335c) Space is not one of the four great material elements 
because it is singular and permanent, has no capability of injuring or 
benefiting, and has no effect. The four great elements are never 
separated from one another; the presence of each can be inferred from 
the observation of their respective activities of supporting, cohesion, 
ripening, and expansion. Apart from these activities, the four 
fundamental material elements have solidity, liquidity, heat, and 
motion respectively as their essential nature. 

13.(E336c) Earth, water, and fire, as popularly conceived, are 


654 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


actually simply visible material form, that is, the object of visual 
perception, and not the great elements themselves. Wind, however, as 
popularly conceived is, at times, merely the visual object, and, at times, 
the great element itself. The world at large recognizes only those 
things that exist as nominally true and not things, such as the four 
great elements, that exist as actual entities. Therefore, common 
parlance does not reflect the true analysis of the composition of 
experience. 

14a-b.(E337b) These five externally directed sense-organs and their 
corresponding objects, which are included in the material aggregate, 
also constitute ten of the twelve sense spheres and ten of the eighteen 
elements. The material aggregate is defined as that which can be 
damaged, is a cause of feelings of frustration, is liable to alteration, 
and offers physical resistance. 

Objection: In that case a single atom, of which all material form is 
composed, would not be material because it, by itself, offers no 
resistance. 

Answer: Atoms are always found in an aggregate, which can then 
offer resistance. Others suggest that even a single atom, though 
incapable of producing consciousness alone, still offers resistance. 
Even though past and future material form, as well as form that will 
not ever arise, offer no resistance, they can still be referred to as 
"material form" because they are of the same category as present 
material form. 

Objection: How can unmanifest form offer resistance, and if it 
cannot, why is it classified as material form? 

Answer: It does not offer resistance, but it is still classified as 
material form. Some have suggested that unmanifest form is given the 
name "material form" because it arises from manifest material form, 
specifically, corporeal and verbal actions, which offer resistance. This 
explanation is unacceptable, because in that case those types of 
unmanifest material form that arise in accordance with mental action 
and are not produced from manifest material form would not be 
classified as material form. We propose that unmanifest material form 
is classified as "material form" because its locus, or the four great 
elements upon which it is based, offer resistance. 

Objection: Unmanifest form should not be classified as "material" 
form simply because its locus is material form. In that case, since the 
loci of the five externally directed types of perceptual consciousness 


NYAYANUSARA 655 


are the material sense organs, perceptual consciousness also should be 
material. 

Answer: Perceptual consciousness cannot be used as a 
counterexample because there are types of perceptual consciousness, 
specifically, ordinary mental perceptual consciousness and mental 
perceptual consciousness in dreams and in the immaterial realm, that 
do not have a material sense organ as their locus. By contrast, there is 
no unmanifest material form not based on the four great elements. 

14c-15.(E338c) The feeling aggregate is experience produced 
through sensory contact. The three kinds of feelings (satisfying, 
frustrating and neutral) each exist as distinct, actual entities. Feelings 
can also be classified as of two types: (1) appropriative feeling, which 
is able to experience the object upon which it is supported, and (2) 
feeling proper, which is able to experience the sense contact to which 
it conforms. The second variety is described as feeling "proper" because 
this function of experiencing contact is not shared by any other mental 
concomitant and therefore is easier to recognize. Feelings can also be 
divided into six varieties depending upon the type of sense contact 
through which they are produced. 

The conceptual identification aggregate is the grasping of marks, 
that is, the grasping of all supporting objects according to their 
particular characteristics. Like feelings, identifications are of either 
three or six varieties. 

The conditioning aggregate includes all conditioning factors--those 
associated with thought and those dissociated from both thought and 
material form--except for those included in the other four aggregates. 

Objection (by the Darstantika teacher Srilata): All conditioning 
factors are merely varieties of thinking. 

Answer: This interpretation is not justified. The aggregate of 
conditioning factors is often represented by thinking because thinking 
is the essence of action, is predominant in thé development of the 
effects of action, and therefore is the primary factor among the 
conditioning aggregates. However, the conditioning aggregate as a 
whole karmically prepares other conditioned and contaminating 
factors. 

Srilata: "Karmically developing conditioning factors" means that 
thought creates conditioning factors that were originally nonexistent. 

Answer: We Abhidharma masters maintain that factors in their 
essential nature exist as actual entities. Only nominal entities can be 


656 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


said to exist after being originally nonexistent. "Developing" means 
projecting the production of an effect: though the effect already exists 
in its essential nature as an actual entity, its activity can be projected 
and then produced. 

These three aggregates of feelings, identifications and conditioning 
factors, together with unmanifest material form and the three 
unconditioned factors, constitute the sense basis of factors and the 
realm of factors. 

16.(E342a) The aggregate of perceptual consciousness is 
apprehension of the general characteristic of a perceptual object. For 
example, visual perceptual consciousness, though presented with 
varieties of material form, grasps only visible color-shape, and as such 
does not apprehend its specific characteristics. Each of the six types of 
perceptual consciousness grasps only its particular kinds of objects. 

Within the classification according to sense bases, these aggregates 
of perceptual consciousness correspond to the mental sense-basis, and 
within the classifice ion according to the elements, to the seven 
elements consisting of the six varieties of perceptual consciousness and 
the mind. The mind element is that variety of perceptual consciousness 
which is immediately past and which constitutes the locus of the 
arising of the present moment of perceptual consciousness. 

17.(E342b) The arising of any variety of perceptual consciousness 
depends upon both a supporting object and a locus; for example, in the 
case of visual perceptual consciousness, the supporting object is a 
colored shape and the basis is the visual sense-organ. Though the 
mental element is, in its nature, simply one of the six varieties of 
perceptual consciousness that has just become past, it is included as a 
separate element in the classification of eighteen elements in order to 
provide a locus for present mental perceptual consciousness. This past 
consciousness acts as the directly antecedent condition for the arising 
of present perceptual consciousness. 

18.(E342c) In these systems of classification, the aggregates include 
all conditioned factors; the grasping aggregates include all 
contaminating and unconditioned factors; and the sense bases and 
elements include all factors. But all factors can also be included in 
three components, one taken from each of the three classification 
systems: the material form aggregate, the mental sense basis, and the 
factor element. The inclusion of a particular factor in any category is 
determined by a similarity of essential nature, and not by the presence 


NYAYANUSARA 657 
of certain conditions. Therefore, the classifications apply regardless of 
the temporal status of a particular factor. 

19.(E343b) Though such factors as the eyes, ears, and so on occur 
in pairs, they have the nature of one element because their category, 
the sense-content upon which they depend, and the perceptual 
consciousness that they produce are the same. Though Vasubandhu 
suggests that they occur in pairs for the sake of beauty, what the world 
considérs beautiful actually has functional superiority. 

20.(E343b) Each of the five aggregates is a group or an 
agglomeration of all varieties of material form, feelings, and so on. A 
sense basis is an entrance because it prepares a way for the arrival of 
awareness and accompanying mental factors. An element is a genus 
(gotra). Though these elements also are foundations from which 
thought and thought concomitants are produced, in order to avoid 
confusion with the sense bases it is best to understand the elements as 
a category of those factors having the same nature. 

Objection: If aggregates are groups they cannot, in themselves, exist 
as actual entities because groups exist only nominally. 

Answer: The genitive determinative compound defining the 
aggregates, sense bases, and elements in the verse indicates that they 
are to be identified with the entity that serves as the locus of the group 
and so on, and not with the group itself; the group has no reality apart 
from its locus. Similarly, as the scriptures state, there is no reality of 
self apart from the aggregates of which it is composed. Though 
actually unlimited, the aggregates are designated as five as an aid to 
disciples in their practice. The fact that each of the five aggregates 
contains many components of the same general nature precludes the 
belief in the existence of a composite entity, equivalent to the 
aggregate as a whole. The term "aggregate" can also be used to refer to 
each factor as it arises, or to several instances of a factor of a given 
category in different states, for example in the future, present, or past. 

These three classification systems of aggregates, sense bases, and 
elements are appropriate to disciples in each of the three levels of 
delusion, three levels of ability, and three levels of preference for a 
particular style of teaching. 

Srilata: The classification of factors into aggregates is presented in 
order to clarify the makeup of composite entities. The classification 
into sense bases indicates the distinction between the object and the 
organ, and the classification into elements indicates the distinctions 


658 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


among the various types of perceptual consciousness according to the 
organ and object by which they are produced. 

Response: This interpretation leads to confusion in the case of the 
classification of the sense bases. Since all factors can be the object of 
mental perceptual consciousness, and therefore, according to your 
interpretation, should be included in the realm of actors, the other 
eleven categories are superfluous. 

Srilata: Indeed, all factors can be included in the one category of the 
realm of factors, the objects of mental perceptual consciousness; the 
other eleven sense bases represent simply varieties within that one 
category. 

Answer: This interpretation contradicts the scripture, which clearly 
states that there are twelve distinct sense bases. Further, though all 
factors can be the object of mental perceptual consciousness, these 
twelve sense bases are established in order to clearly distinguish, by 
mutual contrast, the activity of the organ bases from that of their 
corresponding objects, and the activities of the five externally directed 
organs and their corresponding objects from one another. For 
example, the visual sense organ perceives only visible material form, 
and though visible material form is also a possible object for mental 
perceptual consciousness, it is not an object for any of the other four 
externally directed types of perceptual consciousness. 

22.(E345a) Unconditioned factors cannot be included in any one of 
the aggregates, nor do they constitute their own sixth aggregate since 
there are no varieties of unconditioned factors which can then be 
grouped together by a similarity of essential nature to form an 
aggregate. Further unconditioned factors are not the basis of mistaken 
views like the contaminating grasping aggregates, nor are they 
expedient means for eradicating defilements like the uncontaminating 
aggregates. Others suggest that, because the unconditioned factors are 
equivalent to the inactivity of the aggregates, they cannot themselves 
be aggregates. The inactivity of the aggregates results from the 
termination of the false imagination of self because the aggregates, in 
every case, serve as the basis for the imagination of self. The sense 
bases and elements, however, do not necessarily give rise to the idea 
of self. Therefore, the unconditioned factors can be included within the 
factor basis of the twelve sense bases, or the factor element of the 
eighteen elements. ; 


The order of the five aggregates is determined according to a 


NYAYANUSARA 659 


number of different criteria: for example, their relative grossness; their 
progression in the production of defilement; by analogy with the 
example of a bowl, food, and so on; by their predominance in the three 
realms; or by the order in which they operate in one's progress along 
the path. 

23.(E345c) The order in which the six sense organs are listed--the 
eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind--can be explained by the 
following reasoning. The operation of the first five sense organs occurs 
only with regard to a given present object and necessarily arises before 
the operation of the mind with regard to the same object. Within these 
five, the first two, the eyes and ears, function at a distance because the 
object is not directly contacted; further, the eyes function at a greater 
distance than the ears. The next three, the nose, tongue, and body, are 
arranged in the order of the clarity of their functioning. Finally, the 
order of all six sense organs is determined by their position on the 
body, from the eyes at the top to the major portion of the body below; 
the mind is not located in any one place. 

Objection: If the five externally directed organs function first with 
regard to a given external object, and only then mental perceptual 
consciousness arises with regard to the same object, how is grasping 
an external object possible in a dream? 

Answer: Several explanations of perception in a dream can be 
offered. For example, some suggest that one remembers, through 
mental perceptual consciousness, ubjects perceived previously by the 
five externally directed types of perceptual consciousness. Others 
suggest that mental perceptual consciousness in a dream actually 
perceives material form or other objects. In general, the five externally 
directed organs precede the sixth, mental organ in their operation 
because the perceptual consciousness they and their corresponding 
object produce becomes the equivalent contiguous condition, or the 
mental organ, for the arising of the succeeding mental perceptual 
consciousness. However, there are certain exceptions: for example, 
perception in dreaming and meditation. 

24.(E346b) Though ten of the twelve sense bases have the nature 
of material form and all sense bases may be objects of mental 
perceptual consciousness, they are differentiated in order to enable 
disciples to distinguish their characteristics, that is, to distinguish those 
that are contents and those that are organs, i.e., have contents. The 
visible material sense basis is predominant among all varieties of 


660 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


material form because it is visible and has resistance. Therefore, the 
name of the general category of material form, "7tupa", is also given to 
this subcategory, visible material form. Though the sense basis of 
factors includes many different types of factors, including the factor of 
cessation through realization or nirvana, their character as factors 
enables them to be placed in the same category. 

25-27.(E346c) Other phenomena referred to as aggregates, sense 
bases, or elements are to be included in the appropriate categories 
among the aggregate, sense basis, or element classifications according 
to their own specific characteristic. For example, the scripture 
mentions the 80,000 factor aggregates of which the Buddha's teaching 
is composed. If the essential nature of the teaching is considered to be 
speech, these factor aggregates should be included in the aggregate of 
material form. If, however, the essential nature of the teaching is 
considered to be name, they should be included in the dispositions 
aggregate. ("Name" (nama) is classed as a force dissociated from both 
thought and material form, which force is included within the 
dispositions aggregate.) These 80,000 factor aggregates, have been 
interpreted in various ways, as the content of a specific text by that 
name, or as the discourse on each of the topics of the teachng, but 
actually they are antidotes to the 80,000 types of defiled behavior. 

28.(E347a.23) One other list of elements mentioned in the scripture 
includes the six elements of earth, water, fire, wind, space, and 
perceptual consciousness. This list indicates those components that 
serve as the basis of one lifetime from the moment of conception to 
death. 

Srilata: The space element referred to here is identical with the 
unconditioned factor, space. 

Answer: This opinion is to be rejected. The space element in this list 
of six is to be included in the material form aggregate and is not an 
unconditioned factor. The unconditioned factor, space, and the space 
aggregate both exist as distinct actual entities. The perceptual 
consciousness element referred to in this list of six, which serves as the 
basis of the lifetime of sentient beings, includes only contaminating 
perceptual consciousness. 

29-30a. (E348a) The eighteen elements mentioned previously are 
to be analysed from various perspectives, such as their visibility, 
resistance, moral quality or the realms to which they are connected. 
Resistance can be of three kinds: (1) resistance of a sense-organ, or of 


NYAYANUSARA 661 


awareness or mental concomitants, or of any other factor having a 
content with regard to that content. (2) Resistance of awareness and 
mental concomitants with regard to their own supporting objects. A 
"content" is that place where the sense-organ carries out its function, 
while the supporting object is that which is grasped by awareness and 
mental factors, allowing them to arise. This contact between the 
sense-organ, awareness or awareness concomitants and the content or 
supporting object is referred to as "resistance" because the sense 
organs, awareness and so on cannot operate with regard to anything 
else. (3) Resistance by obstruction, or the prevention of the arising of 
one mass of material form by another in a single place. The ten 
material elements have this type of resistance. 

Among these ten material elements eight, excluding visible matter 
and sound, are morally neutral, that is, they cannot be determined as 
good or bad because their nature is unclear. "Good" refers to that 
which counteracts evil or leads to wisdom. Visible matter includes 
bodily gestures and sound includes speech, both of which may also be 
morally good or bad depending upon whether they are associated with 
a good or bad moment of thought. The seven mental elements are 
good or bad depending upon whether they are associated with the bad 
dispositions of greed, hatred, delusion and so on, or the good 
dispositions of absence of greed and so on. Otherwise, they are neutral. 
The element of factors, that is, the object of mental perceptual 
consciousness, is good or bad depending upon whether or not it is 
associated with or arises from good or bad dispositions. Uncalculated 
cessation, included in the factor element, is also good. All other factors 
are neutral. 

Objection: The group of the five externally directed types of 
perceptual consciousness are nonconceptual and only perceive their 
object for one moment. Therefore, they must be morally neutral. 

Answer: Even if they were nonconceptual they would not 
necessarily be morally neutral. For example, concentrated states of 
mental perceptual consciousness are nonconceptual and yet good. In 
any case, these five externally directed types of perceptual 
consciousness are associated with initial and sustained thought. 
Among the three varieties of conceptual awareness (see 1.33), these 
five types of perceptual consciousness involve construction in its 
essential nature alone. Finally, even if they only grasp the general 
characteristic of their object for one moment, they can still be 


662 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


associated with good or bad associated mental factors for that 
moment, and therefore, can be good or bad. 

30b-31b.(E349b) Concerning the realm to which these eighteen 
elements are connected, all eighteen are connected to the realm of 
desire; fourteen, the eighteen minus odor and flavor and their 
corresponding perceptual consciousnesses, are connected to the 
material realm. These four are absent because they have no function 
other than to stimulate desire for food, and beings in the material 
realm have abandoned desire for food. However, the olfactory and 
gustatory organs are found in the material realm because they also 
serve the functions of beautifying the body and of speech. 

In the immaterial realm only the last three elements including the 
mind element, mental awareness element, and their objects, the 
factors, occur because beings there have abandoned desire for material 
form. Therefore, the five external objects and the five externally 
directed sense-organs, together with their corresponding types of 
perceptual consciousness, are absent. 

31c-d.(E349c) The three (mind, mental awareness, and factor 
elements) are noncontaminating if they pertain to the fourth noble 
truth of the path or are associated with the three unconditioned 
factors; otherwise, they are contaminating. 

32.(E350a) Concerning the association of these eighteen elements 
with initial and sustained thought, the five externally directed types of 
perceptual consciousness are always associated with both initial and 
sustained thought because these types of perceptual consciousness 
arise only in regions where both occur, that is, the realm of desire and 
the first trance state in the material realm. The mental awareness 
element, the mind element, and that part of the factor element 
associated with thought, except for initial and sustained thought 
themselves, are associated with both initial and sustained thought in 
the realm of desire and the first trance state in the material realm. 
They are associated with initial thought alone in the interval between 
the first and second trance states, and with neither in the higher trance 
states. Initial and sustained thought are always associated with one 
another in the realm of desire and the first trance state of the material 
realm. 

33.(E350b) Even though the five externally directed types of 
perceptual consciousness are associated with initial and sustained 
thought, they are said to be nonconceptual because they do not involve 


NYAYANUSARA 663 


conceptual construction through discrimination or through 
recollection. Rather, they involve only conceptual construction in its 
essential nature, which is merely initial thought. Mental perceptual 
consciousness involves all three types of conceptual construction. 
Construction through discrimination refers to distracted wisdom 
associated with mental perceptual consciousness that discriminates the 
supporting object in this way or that. It does not occur in states of 
concentration. Construction through recollection refers to memory 
associated with distracted or concentrated mental perceptual 
consciousness. Conceptual construction occurs only in the immediate 
apprehension of an object and not before or after an object has been 
apprehended. 

34.(E350b) Concerning whether or not these eighteen elements are 
“appropriated", i.e., have supporting objects, the six elements of 
perceptual consciousness, the mind element, and those mental 
concomitants included within the factor element have supporting 
objects. 

Srilata: Neither the supporting object nor the locus that give rise to 
the five externally directed types of perceptual consciousness exist, in 
themselves, as actual entities. The atoms of which they are composed 
only carry out their function as composite objects, not individually, 
and composite objects only exist as notional designations. Therefore, 
the sense bases, which are composite objects, exist only as nominal 
designations; the elements alone exist as actual entities. 

Answer: The five types of perceptual consciousness do indeed have 
an object that exists as an actual entity; that is precisely the individual 
atoms collected together. Individual atoms are visible to the visual 
sense organ, but they cannot be cognized individually. In any case, 
atoms are always found collected together, and as such are both visible 
and capable of being cognized. Further, since the five types of 
externally directed perceptual consciousness lack conceptual 
constructions they cannot take a fully sufficient set of causal conditions 
as their content. A set of conditions is not a distinct factor, and 
therefore cannot be the content of sensory contact. It is grasped only 
by conceptual constructions, and hence is the object of mental 
perceptual consciousness alone. Finally, since no distinction in terms 
of essential nature can be drawn between those factors classified 
among the elements and those classified among the sense bases, one 
cannot consistently maintain that the sense bases are mere composite 


664 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


objects, and hence nominal, while the elements are actual entities. 

The externally directed sense organs are appropriated if presently 
functioning and not if past or future. The four external objects, 
excluding sound, are appropriated if presently perceived, and not if 
past or future, or if present and not perceived. Some claim that 
presently perceived sound should also be appropriated. The term 
"appropriated" refers to those material elements that are taken by 
awareness and accompanying mental factors as their support, and to 
which awareness and accompanying factors conform in terms of 
benefit and injury. 

35.(E352b) Srilata: The tangible element consists only of the great 
elements because this so-called derivative material form is merely a 
distinctive arrangement of these four great elements. Since the eye is 
able to recognize smoothness and so on, derivative material form does 
not exist apart from the four great elements. 

Answer: How does this prove that these types of derivative material 
form are not different from the great material elements? The eye does 
not perceive the great elements themselves, but only the derivative 
material form called "riipa". In any case, since the activities of 
smoothness and so on belonging to derivative material form are 
recognized as distinct from the activities hardness and so on belonging 
to the four great elements, derivative material form and the four great 
elements must be admitted to exist separately. Further, even if we 
admit that smoothness is recognized through a particular arrangement 
of great elements, this smoothness must have a locus, and that locus 
is none other than the derivative material form, smoothness. Like all 
types of perceptual consciousness, tactile perceptual consciousness 
depends upon an actually existent entity and not a nominal 
designation. Smoothness must therefore be actually real and not 
nominal. 

Srilata: Further, lightness and heaviness, two other varieties of 
derivative material form, are established simply by mutual comparison 
and do not exist as actual entities. 

Answer: Though one thing may be light or heavy with respect to 
two different things, itis not light and heavy with regard to the same 
thing. Therefore, though the description of a thing may vary relative 
to other things, its nature as light or heavy is without alteration. 
Varying description does not constitute a reason for the unreality of 
the quality described. 


aprmeses 


NYAYANUSARA 665 


Srilata: Coldness, another type of derivative form, is simply a small 
degree of or the absence of the fundamental element fire. 

Answer: This is not acceptable because injury resulting from cold is 
alleviated by increasing the degree of heat. If cold were merely a small 
degree of heat, it would make sense to alleviate a small bum with more 
heat. Also, the mere absence of heat is a form of nonexistence, and 
nonexistence cannot be cognized and cannot have activity such as that 
exerted by cold. Further, since the fire element, as one of the four 
fundamental elements, is present in all material form, nothing could 
become cold; the existence and nonexistence of the same quality, in 
this case heat, cannot be simultaneously maintained in the same 
entity. 

Srilata: Hunger and thirst have the mental factor called "interest" as 
their nature and therefore do not exist as actual entities. 

Answer: Interest is one of the ten concomitants of awareness always 
present in moments of thought, and yet hunger and thirst are not 
always present. Therefore, hunger and thirst must be distinct from 
interest. 

Srilata: All types of derivative form are nothing other than the four 
great elements. 

Answer: In that case, all material sensory objects would have the 
same characteristics of hardness and so on that define the four great 
elements, and the sensory range of all externally directed sense-organs 
would be identical. Furthermore, the sense-organs and their objects 
would have the same inherent characteristic of hardness and so on, 
and would not be capable of being distinguished from one another. 

Only the ten material elements, including the five sense-organs and 
their objects, are referred to as collected because they consist of 
conglomerations of atoms. Unmanifest form does not consist of such 
conglomerations. 

36.(E357c.26) Concerning the activities of cutting, burning, and 
weighing, of these eighteen elements, the four sensory objects of 
material form, odor, flavor, and the tangible are cut, can cut, are 
burned and weigh. 

Objection: How can conditioned factors that are momentary by 
nature cut and be cut? 

Answer: The stream of successively arising factors or atoms is 
divided, giving rise to a separate stream. Sense-organs cannot be 
divided in this way, such that a second functioning organ is produced; 


666 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


nor can they cut because they are composed of a subtle material form 
that is transparent. Sound is excluded because its stream is 
discontinuous. There is disagreement among masters as to what burns 
and has weight. Some say that the fundamental material element of 
fire alone burns, and heaviness, among the seven types of derived 
material form, has weight; others say that these four sense objects 
burn and have weight. 

37.(E358a) Concerning the manner of arising, status as an actual 
entity, and momentariness of these eighteen elements, the five 
personal sense bases are said to be results of karmic maturation or 
through accumulation. Though they are also the result of outflow, as 
when a past eye acts as the cause of the present eye, they are never the 
result of outflow alone. The term "vipdkaja", "result of karmic 
maturation", is interpreted in various ways: an effect is produced by 
maturing apart from the cause; or, it is produced from a cause of 
maturation, that is, a past action. 

Accumulation is growth resulting from food, sleep, and so on. The 
stream of the effects of accumulation protects the stream of the effects 
of maturation, and there are no effects of maturation apart from 
accumulation. There are, however, effects of accumulation apart from 
those of maturation. 

Sound is not an effect of maturation, because it is discontinuous and 
arises in accord with one's wish at any given time. It is, however, the 
result of outflow and of accumulation. 

The seven mental elements and the factor element are effects of 
maturation and effects of outflow, from homogeneous or pervasive 
causes. They are not the effects of accumulation because, unlike 
material form, they do not consist of collections of atoms, and 
therefore cannot be accumulated. 

The four remaining elements--visible material form, odors, flavors, 
and tangibles--are effects of maturation, accumulation, and outflow. 

Some suggest that the factor element alone exists as an actual entity 
because it contains the unconditioned factors. That mind, factor 
element, and mental awareness which occur with the first moment of 
noncontaminating thought, that is, the first moment of the noble path, 
are said to be momentary; they are not the result of outflow produced 
by prior homogeneous causes because they are the first 
uncontaminating factors to arise within the life-stream of 
contaminating factors. 


NYAYANUSARA 667 


Others suggest that all factors exist as actual entities and all factors, 
with the exception of the unconditioned factors, are momentary. 

39.(E360b) Concerning which of these eighteen elements are 
internal or external, twelve elements, including the six types of 
perceptual consciousness and their six corresponding organ-bases, are 
internal, while the six objects are external. There exists no self by 
which the "internal" can be determined. However, Vasubandhu 
suggests that since awareness serves as the basis for the sense of self, 
itcan be referred to figuratively as the internal "self", and those factors 
that serve as its basis, that is, the sense bases, should be internal. 

This interpretation is unacceptable because there would inevitably 
be confusion concerning whether or not certain factors act as the basis 
of thought. For example, how can present or future moments of 
perceptual consciousness possibly act as the basis of a present moment 
of perceptual consciousness, and thereby be considered internal? Or, 
why aren't thought concomitants, the objects of thought that are 
simultaneous with and share the same effect as thought, considered 
internal? Instead, the "self" should be figuratively understood as 
referring to that which always operates with complete self-mastery 
with regard to its own object; thereby, the thought concomitants 
would be excluded from what is "self" and internal. 

Srilata: Even though all factors including thoughts are to be 
included in the factor element as objects of mental perceptual 
consciousness, a distinction can still be drawn between internal and 
external as follows. That which serves as the locus for the six types of 
perceptual consciousness is internal, and that which serves as their 
supporting object is external. A sense organ can then be either internal 
or external depending upon whether it is the locus for the arising of 
perceptual consciousness or its supporting object. 

Response: This interpretation is to be rejected. One should not 
assume that simply because mental perceptual consciousness is 
capable of taking any factor as its supporting object, all factors are to 
be included in the factor element. Further, we would also accept that 
the loci of perceptual consciousness are referred to as internal, and 
their supporting objects are external. However, the sense organs 
should not be considered to be at times internal and at times external 
depending on their role as locus or supporting object. The immediately 
prior moment of perceptual consciousness and the other sense organs 
are characterized by their nature as loci of perceptual consciousness in 


668 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


all three time periods even though they can also function as supporting 
objects. Therefore, they should always be classed as internal. Those 
factors that can never be the loci of perceptual consciousness are then 
external. 

The eighteen elements can also be classed as homogeneous or 
partially homogeneous. Those elements that have carried out their 
own activity, are carrying it out, or will carry it out together are called 
homogeneous because they share their function, depend for their 
functioning upon the functioning of others, or share the same contact. 
For example, when the eye and the object function as the conditions 
for the arising of visual perceptual consciousness, these three elements 
are homogeneous. The elements that do not carry out their activity are 
partially homogeneous because they are of the same category as those 
elements that do function. That is to say, they have the same specific 
characteristic, or are classed as the same sensory basis or element, and 
so on. The factor element is only homogeneous because there is no 
factor with regard to which mental perceptual consciousness has not 
arisen, is not arising, or will not arise. Mental perceptual consciousness 
is always homogeneous unless it does not arise; in that case, it is 
partially homogeneous. The organs are determined to be 
homogeneous or partially homogeneous only with regard to the life- 
stream in which they function. Therefore, if they are homogeneous 
with regard to a particular life-stream, they are exclusively 
homogeneous. The same object, however, can be homogeneous to one 
who perceives it, and partially homogeneous to one who does not. 

40.(E362b) Concerning the method by which these eighteen 
elements are abandoned: 


Those elements that are not defiled, or that are not produced from the 
mental organ, or that are material form, whether defiled or undefiled, 
are to be abandoned by the path of cultivation and by the path of 
vision. Further, those elements that are uncontaminating are not to be 
abandoned. Therefore, fifteen elements--the ten elements of material 
form and the five externally directed types of perceptual 
consciousness--are to be abandoned by cultivation. Within the last 
three elements--the mind, mental perceptual consciousness, and the 
factor element--some are to be abandoned by the path of vision, some 
by the path of cultivation, and some are not to be abandoned. 
41-42.(E363c) Concerning which of these elements are 


NYAYANUSARA 669 


characterized as view, only two among ail factors have view as their 
essential nature: among factors having material form, the visual sense- 
organ alone is view because it illumines visual matter, it opposes 
darkness, and its activity is acute; among factors lacking material form, 
internally directed wisdom that is acute with respect to reflection upon 
the features of the mental object, and judges it, has view. This wisdom 
is of eight types: including the five defiled views, beginning with the 
view that the self is identified with the body, and the three types of 
correct views, including the worldly correct view, the correct view of 
the disciple, and the correct view of the adept. These eight types of 
view represent stages in the cultivation of purity and clarity of insight 
into an object; the purity or clarity does not then reside in the object, 
but rather in the view itself. 

Only the wisdom associated with mental perceptual consciousness 
consists of both reflection upon and judgment of an object; therefore, 
the wisdom associated with the other five types of perceptual 
consciousness does not have view. 

Objection: If this were so, the visual sense-organ also should not 
have view because it lacks judgment. : 

Answer: As we have explained, the visual sense-organ has view or 
sees because it illumines material form, and so on. 

Objection: If the organ itself perceives, then all objects would be 
perceived at one time by their corresponding organs. 

Answer: Only the homogeneous eye, that is, the eye that functions 
together with visual perceptual consciousness, sees, and not all eyes in 
all three time periods. 

Objection: In that case, it is visual perceptual consciousness and not 
the eye that sees. 

Answer: No, since visual perceptual consciousness cannot see apart 
from the eye, perceptual consciousness merely serves as the support 
for the predominant activity of vision, which is unique to the eye. 
Further, since all six types of perceptual consciousness have the same 
nature, if visual perceptual consciousness had the capability of sight, 
all six types of perceptual consciousness would have the same 
capability. Only the sense organ loci are capable of distinguishing the 
various types of perceptual consciousness. Further, if visual perceptual 
consciousness were capable of sight, one should be able to see even 
when one is blind or asleep. 

Other masters claim that if visual perceptual consciousness were 


670 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


capable of sight, obstructed objects should be seen; perceptual 
consciousness has no resistance, and therefore should not be 
obstructed by physical objects. To this Vasubandhu responds simply 
that since visual perceptual consciousness does not arise with respect 
to an obstructed object, it cannot be expected to see. However, as has 
been shown, even if visual perceptual consciousness were to arise, one 
cannot claim that visual perceptual consciousness alone among the six 
varieties of perceptual consciousness sees. Further, Vasubandhu gives 
no reason why visual perceptual consciousness cannot arise with 
regard to an obstructed object. If he claims that visual perceptual 
consciousness sees colored shapes, since it is without physical 
resistance, it should arise even with regard to an obstructed object. Or, 
if he claims that visual perceptual consciousness cognizes colored 
shapes, and such cognition does not arise with respect to obstructed 
objects, this assumes that visual cognition proceeds in accordance with 
the same object as the visual organ--a position that implies that the 
visual organ sees. Further, visual perceptual consciousness arises with 
respect to objects obstructed by other transparent objects. The 
nonobstruction of light by transparent objects cannot account for the 
arising of visual perceptual consciousness because nocturnal animals 
are capable of seeing even in darkness; we cannot assume that the 
same darkness prevents sight in the case of human beings and allows 
it in the case of animals. 

For those who accept the theory that the eye sees, the eye is 
incapable of seeing an obstructed object because that eye has 
resistance. Since visual perceptual consciousness proceeds in 
accordance with the same object as its locus, the eye, it cannot cognize 
obstructed objects. Vasubandhu maintains that visibility of an object 
obstructed by something transparent is due to the ability of light to 
pass through to the object. I (Samghabhadra), however, claim that the 
visibility or invisibility of an obstructed object depends upon the 
degree of resistance offered by the atomic structure of the obstruction. 

The visual organ has two activities: (1) it acts as a door, or as the 
locus for the emerging of aspects within awareness and accompanying 
mental factors with regard to the object. (2) It is able to grasp the 
object, that is, it sees colored shapes. Now we maintain that visual 
perceptual consciousness supports the eye and enables it to see 
because the eye cannot see apart from visual perceptual consciousness. 
However, visual perceptual consciousness itself does not see because, 


NYAYANUSARA 671 


if it did, all types of perceptual consciousness, which are not different 
in nature from one another, should be able to see. The difference in the 
perceptual activity of seeing, hearing and so on can only be accounted 
for by the distinctions among the various organs. 

Darstantika: The distinctions among the sense organ, perceptual 
consciousness, and the object are merely figurative; sight is simply a 
phenomenon that occurs as a result of causal process. 

Answer: This interpretation fails to take into account the specific 
characteristic and activity of individual factors by which factors are 
distinguished from one another and their causal interaction is 
determined. The Buddha advises only that we not pursue and become 
attached to the universal characteristic or to the gross activities that 
are employed conventionally in describing composite objects. 
However, to deny the actual specific characteristic and activity of 
factors that are the highest reality is to blur the distinction between the 
highest reality and what is only conventionally real. Finally, causal 
interaction can only be maintained as long as the specific characteristic 
and activity of distinct factors is maintained. 

43ab.(E368a) Both eyes can be said to see material form at the 
same time because the object appears clearer when both eyes are open. 
If the eyes saw in succession, there would be no difference between the 
clarity of an object seen with two eyes or one. 

Srilata: The two eyes give rise to their activity successively. 
Perceptual consciousness produced by two eyes is clearer than that 
produced by one alone because the two successive moments of the 
visual organ exchange their activity producing a clearer perceptual 
consciousness. 

Answer: Whether one or two eyes are open in any given moment, 
only one moment of visual perceptual consciousness is produced. 
However, if two eyes, both open, acted successively, they would 
produce two distinct moments of visual perceptual consciousness: 
Finally, since awareness and accompanying mental factors, which 
include all varieties of perceptual consciousness, cannot be established 
in a particular place, the two spatially distinct sense-organs do not 
produce two spatially distinct instances of visual perceptual 
consciousness. 

43cd.(E370a) Concerning whether or not the various sense-organs 
touch their respective objects: If we understand "touch" to mean that 
the capability of the sense organ reaches the object, all sense-organs 


672 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


"touch" their objects. However, if we understand "touch" to mean that 
atoms of the organ and the object are found without an interval 
between them, the following points should be made. The eye does not 
touch its object because both close and distant objects can be seen at 
the same time, it can see objects obstructed by other transparent 
objects, and it cannot see objects with which it comes into direct 
contact, like eye ointment. Further, the eye can produce doubtful or 
erroneous visual perceptual consciousness; if it touched its object, all 
visual perceptual consciousnesses would be certain. The ear also does 
not touch its object because distinctions of direction, distance, and 
clarity are noticed in the perception of sounds. The mind does not 
touch its object because it does not apprehend connected factors that 
are simultaneous with it. Further, the mind is not material form, and 
therefore cannot touch or be touched. 

Objection: If these organs do not touch their objects, what prevents 
any of these organs from apprehending, at all times and in all places, 
all such untouched objects? 

Answer: These organs are like a magnet or a mirror. Even though 
they do not touch their objects, at any given time they only operate 
with regard to some objects, and not all. 

Concerning the inability of the eye to grasp objects in the dark, the 
Darstantikas propose that it is due to the absence of light, which is a 
necessary condition assisting in the arising of visual perceptual 
consciousness. However, I propose that an object is not seen in the 
dark due to the obstruction of darkness, which can then be 
counteracted by light; darkness and light exist as two distinct and 
actual entities. 

The nose, the tongue, and the body are said to touch their objects. 
"Touching" here cannot mean direct contact between atoms because 
if atoms came into contact with their entire extent, they would merge 
completely, and if they only came into partial contact these atoms, 
which are by definition, partless, would have parts. Therefore, to 
"touch" means that atoms of the organ and the object arises in close 
proximity to one another. 

Some maintain that though atoms do not come into contact with 
one another, they form composite objects that can have contact. 
However, since the composite object does not exist apart from the 
atoms, if the composite object comes into contact, the atoms must also. 

Srilata: There must be material contact; otherwise, atoms would not 


NYAYANUSARA 673 


hold together and there would be no composite objects. This 
composite object cannot simply be held together by the air element. 

Answer: On the contrary, a composite object consists simply of 
atoms arranged in close proximity that hold together due to the force 
of the air element. Similarly, injury and benefit are to be explained not 
through direct contact, but rather through mutual proximity. 

One master proposes that atoms do not contact one another; 
instead, the idea of contact arises when there is no interval between 
atoms. This proposal can be accepted as long as a clear distinction is 
drawn between "having no interval" and "contact". "Having no interval" 
means that the atoms of the four fundamental elements arise in close 
proximity; it does not mean that atoms have contact and hence, parts. 
Nor does it mean that they have no resistance and hence abide in the 
same place. 

44. (E373c.18) For the three sense-organs that touch their objects, 
the number of atoms apprehended in the object can be no greater than 
the number of atoms in the sense-organ. For the visual and auditory 
sense-organs, the object may be either larger than, equivalent to, or 
smaller than the sense-organ. Since the mind is without material form, 
its size cannot be discussed. 

Since the atoms in these five externally directed organs cannot be 
seen, their arrangement is difficult to determine, but because they 
have resistance, and therefore occupy a particular place, they are 
arranged. The atoms of the visual organ are found in the pupil covered 
with a transparent shield, or according to others, are themselves 
transparent and arranged in a lump on the front of the material 
eyeball. The atoms of the auditory organ are found in the cavity of the 
ear, the atoms of the olfactory organ within the nostrils, the atoms of 
the gustatory organ on the surface of the tongue, and those of the 
tactile organ all over the body. 

The atoms of the visual, auditory, olfactory, and gustatory organs 
can be all homogeneous, all partially homogeneous, or both. However, 
the atoms of the tactile organ can never all be homogeneous (see 
1.39). 

Since the five externally directed types of perceptual consciousness 
take only collections of atoms as their locus and supporting object, one 
atom of the sense-organ or object will not give rise to perceptual 
consciousness. 

Concerning the time period during which the locus and supporting 


674 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


object of any given moment of perceptual consciousness occur, the 
mental organ, or the basis of mental perceptual consciousness, is any 
of the six varieties of perceptual consciousness that has immediately 
passed away; there, it is past. This past locus is also the equivalent 
contiguous condition for the arising of present mental perceptual 
consciousness. However, the immediately preceding accompanying 
mental factors, which are also equivalent contiguous conditions for 
present mental perceptual consciousness, are not its locus. The five 
externally directed types of perceptual consciousness each have two 
loci: the immediately preceding mental organ, and the present 
corresponding sense-organ of the eye, and so on. The immediately 
preceding mental organ is both the equivalent contiguous condition 
and the locus for these five externally directed types of perceptual 
consciousness. However, their respective sense-organs are only their 
loci and not their equivalent contiguous conditions because these 
sense-organs are simultaneous with them and are not thought 
concomitants. 

Whereas mental perceptual consciousness takes objects from all 
three time periods as its supporting object, the supporting objects of 
the five externally directed types of perceptual consciousness are only 
present temporally. The sense-organs specific to the five externally 
directed types of perceptual consciousness operate only with regard to 
present objects, and perceptual consciousness must operate with 
regard to the same object as its locus. 

Some claim that the five externally directed types of perceptual 
consciousness operate only with regard to past objects, which exist 
only as nominal designations, and not as actual entities. However, this 
position results in several faults: (1) As nominal designations these 
past objects could become the object only of constructionfilled 
thought. Since the five externally directed types of perceptual 
consciousness are constructionfree in the sense that they lack two of 
the three varieties of discursive thought, how could they then take 
nominal designations as their objects? (2) Present perceptual 
consciousness should take all past objects as its supporting object 
because no distinction can be made between objects of the 
immediately preceding moment or remote past. (3) If you claim that 
an object serves as the supporting object of perceptual consciousness, 
you should claim that future perceptual consciousness, which is on the 
point of arising, takes a present object. (4) The three sense-organs of 


NYAYANUSARA 675 


the nose, the tongue and the skin would not touch their objects since 
past objects are distant. (5) If all objects are only past, direct 
perception becomes impossible. 

45.(E375a) The sense-organs and not the supporting objects are 
referred to as the loci of perceptual consciousness because changes in 
the quality of the sense-organ produce similar changes in the quality 
of its corresponding perceptual consciousness. Changes in the object 
produce no such changes in the quality of perception. 

Objection: Since changes in the body result in changes in the quality 
of mental perceptual consciousness, the body also should be the locus 
of mental perceptual consciousness. 

Answer: Changes in the body produce changes in its corresponding 
tactile perceptual consciousness. When this tactile perceptual 
consciousness becomes past, it acts as the mental organ (or locus), and 
as the equivalent contiguous condition for the arising of present 
mental perceptual consciousness. This present mental perceptual 
consciousness can then be indirectly affected by changes in the body. 

Perceptual consciousness is named according to its corresponding 
organ and notits corresponding object because consciousness changes 
in accord with the organ and not the object, and because whereas the 
object may be shared by the perceptual consciousness of many people, 
the organ is unique to each one. Though the arising of perceptual 
consciousness depends upon many causes and conditions, the organ 
and the object are designated as the locus and supporting object 
because they are essential for its arising in each and every case. 

46-47.(E375c) Concerning the stage to which the body, eye, visual 
color-shape and visual perceptual consciousness belong: for one born 
at a particular state, in general, the eye is never of a stage lower than 
the body. Color-shape and visual perceptual consciousness are never 
of a higher stage than the eye. Color-shape may be of a higher, lower, 
or the same stage as visual perceptual consciousness, and color-shape 
and visual perceptual consciousness may be of a higher, lower, or the 
same stage as the body. The same holds for the ear. For the nose, 
tongue and the body, all belong to the same stage, but in some cases 
tactile perceptual consciousness may be of a lower stage. The mental 
organ may belong to a higher, lower, or the same stage as its 
corresponding perceptual consciousness, object, and body. 

48.(E377a) Concerning the medium of perception for each of the 
eighteen elements, the five external sense objects are perceived by 


676 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


their corresponding perceptual consciousness and by mental 
perceptual consciousness. All other elements are perceived only by 
mental perceptual consciousness. Concerning which of the elements 
are permanent, only the three unconditioned factors, included as one 
part of the factor element, are permanent. Concerning those elements 
that are controlling faculties, the five sense organs, the seven mental 
elements, part of the tactile organ element, and part of the factor 
element are controlling faculties. The tactile organ element includes 
the masculine and feminine faculties, and the seven mental elements 
constitute the mental faculty. Those controlling faculties included 
within the factor element are the five feeling faculties of satisfaction, 
frustration, contentedness, irritation and equanimity; the five faculties 
of faith, energy, mindfulness, meditation and insight; the controlling 
faculty of vitality; and the three faculties of coming to know what is as 
yet unknown, understanding, and perfect knowledge. 


CHAPTER TWO 


1.(E377b) These elements listed in the previous verse are 
enumerated as controlling faculties because they are dominant or have 
supreme self-mastery with regard to a certain state. Though all factors 
have their own dominant activity, these twenty-two are exceptionally 
powerful, and therefore are listed separately. 

The five sense organs have control over beauty, protection, the 
clarity of perceptual consciousness and its associated thoughts, and the 
particular sensory activity of each organ. The feminine and masculine 
faculties control the primary distinctions among sentient beings 
according to gender and differences of secondary characteristics. 
According to others, the masculine and feminine faculties control the 
possibility of complete affliction and purification of defilement since 
eunuchs are not capable of either. Vitality controls the connection to 
the psycho-physical complex from one lifetime to the next, and the 
support of that homogeneous character in one lifetime (see 2.42). The 
mental faculty controls the connection to the first moment of the next 
existence, and it controls all factors since all factors come under the 
mastery of the mind. The five feeling faculties and the five faculties 
beginning with faith control affliction and purification since they 
respectively produce and remove defilements. 

2-4.(E377c) Those, like Vasubandhu, who claim that perceptual 


NYAYANUSARA 677 


consciousness and not the sense organ sees, object to this explanation 
of the activity of the sense organ faculties, claiming that perceptual 
consciousness has the function of protection and of the particular 
sensory activities. They claim that the functions exerted by the 
controlling factors should be explained differently. However, these 
explanations as offered by these verses of the Abhidharmakosa either 
contradict doctrine or merely repeat the explanations of Verse 1. 

5.(E379a) Other factors that have certain areas of control, such as 
ideas, or defilements, of nirvana, of the five organs of action proposed 
by the Samkhya school, are not controlling faculties because only those 
factors that support, differentiate, afflict, prepare ‘o purify, and purify 
perceptual consciousness are referred to as controlling faculties. 

6.(E379c) Others suggest that fourteen of these twenty-two 
controlling faculties are the loci, the origin, the continuation, and 
feeling of samsara; the remaining eight have the same functions with 
regard to nirvana. 

7-9.(E379c) Concerning the nature of these controlling faculties, 
satisfaction and frustration characterize corporeal feelings, that is, 
those associated with the five externally directed types of perceptual 
consciousness, while contentedness and irritation characterize mental 
feelings, or those associated with the sixth type of mental perceptual 
consciousness. Equanimity is neither agreeable nor disagreeable and 
is not designated as corporeal or mental because it is not produced 
through discursive thought. 

The three uncontaminating controlling faculties--coming to know 
what is not yet known, understanding, and perfect knowledge--each 
consist of these nine other faculties: the mental organ, satisfaction, 
contentedness, equanimity, and the five faculties beginning with faith, 
which belong to the path of vision, the path of cultivation, and the path 
beyond training respectively. 

Like all factors, these controlling faculties can be classified 
according to a number of different perspectives. Concerning those that 
are contaminating or noncontaminating, the last three faculties, 
coming to know and so on, are noncontaminating. The seven material 
faculties, vitality, and the two disagreeable feelings are contaminating, 
and the remaining nine faculties can be either contaminating or 
noncontaminating. 

10a-c.(E380c) Concerning those faculties that are the result of 
maturation, vitality is only the result of maturation. 


678 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Objection: Vitality that results from the practice of meditation 
cannot be the result of the maturation of past actions. 

Vasubandhu: This vitality is merely the momentum of the period of 
abiding of the fundamental elements of which the material basis and 
the sense organs are composed. In meditation, that momentum 
produced from past action is exchanged fora momentum produced by 
the power of meditation. 

Answer: This interpretation is to be rejected. Instead, the vitality 
resulting from meditation is a result of the practice of meditation itself, 
or of the transformation of the effects of certain prior acts, from 
maturation having the effect of enjoyment to maturation having the 
effect of vitality. 

Irritation and the last eight controlling faculties--the five beginning 
with faith and the three noncontaminating faculties--are never the 
result of maturation because they are morally determinate as good or 
bad; results of maturation are always morally neutral. The seven 
material faculties are results of maturation except when they are the 
result of accumulation. The mental faculties and the four feeling 
faculties, excluding irritation, are the result of maturation except when 
they are morally good or bad or arise in association with the three 
indeterminate factors, the modes of proper deportment, skill in the 
arts, and magical creations. 

10c-11a.(E381a) Concerning those faculties that produce a 
matured effect, only irritation always has a matured effect. Those 
faculties that are neutral and those that are noncontaminating never 
have a matured effect. Among the remaining ten faculties, including 
the mental faculty, the four feelings with the exception of irritation, 
and the five beginning with faith, those that are good or bad and are 
contaminating have a matured effect; those that are neutral or are 
noncontaminating do not have a matured effect. 

11b-d.(E381b) Concerning their moral quality, the last eight 
faculties are only good. Irritation is either good or bad. The mental 
faculty and the other four feeling faculties are good, bad or neutral. 
The first eight faculties including the five sense-organs, the masculine 
and feminine faculties, and vitality are only indeterminate. 

12.(E381b) Concerning the realm to which the various faculties are 
connected, nineteen are connected to the realm of desire: that is, all 
with the exception of the last three noncontaminating faculties. Fifteen 
of these nineteen are connected to the material realm: that is, 


(RET ate RTT Sg, RESIST A NB 


ene 


NYAYANUSARA 679 


excluding the masculine and feminine faculties, irritation and 
frustration. Eight of these fifteen are connected to the immaterial 
realm: that is, excluding the five material faculties, satisfaction, and 
contentedness. 

13.(381c) Concerning the method by which they are abandoned, 
those that are contaminating are to be abandoned by the path of vision 
or the path of cultivation, and those that are noncontaminating are not 
to be abandoned. Even those noncontaminating faculties that are not 
to be abandoned by either path can be said to be abandoned upon 
attaining nirvana without remainder. Those faculties that are defiled, 
are mental, or are produced by the six types of perceptual 
consciousness are to be abandoned by the path of vision. Those that 
are material or are undefiled are to be abandoned by the path of 
cultivation. The mental faculty, satisfaction, contentment and 
equanimity may be abandoned by the path of vision, by the path of 
cultivation, or are not to be abandoned. Frustration is to be abandoned 
by the path of vision or cultivation. The seven material faculties, 
vitality, and frustration are to be abandoned only by the path of 
cultivation. The five faculties of faith and so on are to be abandoned 
by the path of cultivation or are not to be abandoned. The three 
noncontaminating faculties are not to be abandoned. 

14.(E381c) Concerning those faculties that are first acquired at the 
moment of conception, only those that are the result of maturation 
(see 2.10a-c) can be so considered. In the case of beings born from an 
egg, the womb, or by moisture in the realm of desire, only the tactile 
faculty (i.e., the body) and vitality are acquired first. In the case of 
beings born by spontaneous generation, for whom there is no growth, 
six, seven, or eight faculties are acquired first at conception: that is, the 
five sense organs and vitality, and possibly the masculine or feminine 
faculties, or both. Beings born in the material realm attain six faculties: 
thatis, the five sense organs and vitality. Those born in the immaterial 
realm acquire only one faculty: vitality. From this it is clear that vitality 
exists as an actual entity: otherwise, there would be nothing upon 
which birth in the immaterial realm could depend. 

15-16b.(E382a) Concerning the faculties that cease at the moment 
of death, for beings in the immaterial realm, whose thoughts are 
defiled or neutral, vitality, the mental faculty, and equanimity cease at 
the last moment. In order to explain death in the immaterial realm, 
vitality must be accepted, since in the immaterial realm there is no 


680 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


other effect of maturation whose termination will result in death. In 
the material realm vitality, the mental faculty, and equanimity 
together with the five material sense-organs cease at the moment of 
death. In the case of sudden death in the realm of desire, there are ten, 
nine, or eight faculties that cease at the last moment, including the 
previous eight and one or two gender faculties. In the case of gradual 
death in the realm of desire there are four faculties that cease at the 
moment of death: the tactile organ, vitality, the mental organ and 
equanimity. For those beings whose thought is good at the moment of 
death, the five faculties beginning with faith should be added to the 
previous cases. 

16c-17b.(E382b) Concerning the faculties characterizing one who 
attains any of the four fruits of the path, the first fruit of the stream- 
enterer and the last fruit of the perfected being are attained through 
nine faculties; the mental faculty, equanimity, the five faculties 
beginning with faith, and the two uncontaminating faculties, coming 
to know and perfected knowledge. The second fruit, the once returner, 
and the third fruit of the nonreturner are attained through seven, 
eight, or nine faculties depending upon the path through which they 
are attained. 

17d-19.(E382c) When certain faculties are present, others are also 
necessarily present. For example, anyone accompanied by vitality, the 
mental faculty, or equanimity is necessarily accompanied by all three. 
Or, anyone accompanied by one of the five sense organs is necessarily 
accompanied by these first three and the tactile organ. 

20.(E383b) The minimum number of faculties possessed by any 
being is eight; that is, for example, in the case of one in the realm of 
desire who lacks the good roots the eight include vitality, the mental 
faculty, the tactile organ, and the five feeling faculties. An ordinary 
being born in the immaterial realm also has only eight: equanimity, 
vitality, the mental faculty, and the five faculties beginning with faith. 

21.(E383b) The maximum number of faculties is nineteen: (1) a 
hermaphrodite lacks the three noncontaminating faculties, or (2) one 
in the learner's path lacks one of the sexual faculties, the last faculty of 
perfected knowledge, and if still in the path of vision, the faculty of 
understanding, or if still in the path of cultivation, the faculty of 
coming to know. 

22.(E383c) Now, all conditioned factors arise from both previous 
and simultaneous causes and conditions. The simultaneous arising of 


i eam 3 ein, nee mitten 


NYAYANUSARA 681 


various conditioned factors will be presented in order to refute 
erroneous theories of causation. For example, some maintain that 
conditioned factors arise only from previous causes, or that they arise 
from only one cause, or that they arise from their own essential nature, 
or that they arise spontaneously without a cause. 

First, concerning the simultaneous arising of factors that are 
material form, in the realm of desire, a molecule of material form 
consists of eight actual entities that arise together: that is, the four 
great elements and the four derived elements, which are the four sense 
spheres of visible color-form, odor, flavor, and the tangible. A molecule 
of animated material form also has at least nine actual entities 
including one atom of the tactile organ. If sound is present, the number 
is raised to ten or eleven respectively. Molecules in the realm of form 
lack odor and flavor, but otherwise are the same as those in the realm 
of desire. 

An atom is the finest particle of material form having resistance, 
which is not capable of further analysis either by another particle of 
material form or by the intellect. Such atoms are never found 
separately, but rather are always collected in molecules. 

The term “actual entity" (dravya) is used here both in the strict 
sense of a distinct actual entity characterized by its own specific 
characteristic, for example, the four great elements, and in the broader 
sense of a category characterized by a certain general characteristic, 
for example, the four sense fields of visible material form, and so on. 

23a-b.(384a) Concerning the simultaneous arising of those factors 
that are not material form, awareness and accompanying mental 
factors necessarily arise simultaneously, and all conditioned factors 
necessarily arise simultaneously with the four conditioning 
characteristics (see 2.45-46). Those factors indicative of sentient 
beings also necessarily arise simultaneously with their possession (see 
2.36). 

The factors in the first of the five groups indicated in the text 
("generally permeating") are called "mahabhiimika" because they are 
"great" (maha), or found in all moments of thought of their category, 
and they originate from or are contained within the stage (bhumi), 
that is, awareness. 

24.(E384a) Srilata: There are actually only three, and not ten 
factors that accompany every awareness: that is, feelings, 
identifications, and thinkings. Contact is, according to scripture, 


682 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


nothing more than the composite of the locus, supporting object, and 
perceptual consciousness; contact does not exist as a distinct actual 
entity. 

Answer: This scriptural passage presents the conditions for the 
arising of contact, and notits particular inherent characteristic. In any 
case, since Srilata's school does not accept simultaneous arising and 
mutual causality, he should not suggest that the three simultaneous 
factors, the locus, object, and perceptual consciousness, are mutually 
cause and effect, and that their assemblage is provisionally referred to 
as contact. Contact, like all mental factors, cannot be discerned 
independently, but it can be known to exist through its activity; that is, 
it acts as the cause of feeling. 

Similarly, Srlata's attempts to refute the existence of other mental 
factors by reducing them to capabilities of thought itself are futile. The 
existence of these mental factors is established by their activity. 
Further, Srilata should explain how he justifies the existence of only 
the first three mental factors--feelings, identifications, and thinkings-- 
apart from awareness. For these reasons, these ten generally 
permeating accompanying factors should be accepted as distinct 
factors that exist as actual entities apart from thought. 

27.(E392a) The first ten accompanying factors listed in the text are 
found in afflicted awarenesses. They are associated with that 
ignorance which arises through mental perceptual consciousness and 
is to be abandoned through the path of cultivation. In addition to these 
mental factors there are others that are undetermined and may be 
associated with thought of any moral quality: they include regret, 
sleepiness, pride, initial and sustained thought and so on. All these 
mental factors exist as actual entities. 

28-30.(E392a) Five types of awareness are distinguished according 
to their moral quality: (1) good, (2) bad and characterized by 
ignorance alone, (3) bad and characterized by other defilements, (4) 
neutral and obstructed due to association with false views, and (5) 
neutral and not obstructed. Concerning those accompanying factors 
that necessarily arise with moments of awareness of these five types, 
in the realm of desire good awareness is associated with at least 
twenty-two mental factors: the ten generally permeating factors, the 
ten good permeating factors, initial and sustained thought. Good 
awareness may also be associated with regret. Bad awareness 

independent of all defilements except ignorance is associated with at 


NYAYANUSARA 683 


least twenty mental factors: the ten generally permeating mental 
factors, the six defiled permeating factors, the two bad factors (ust 
and hatred), and the two neutral ones (initial and sustained thought). 
Abad awareness, when associated with one of the four defilements of 
attachment and so on, or with one of the secondary defilements, or 
with regret, is associated with twenty-one mental factors. An 
unobstructed neutral awareness is associated with at least eighteen: 
the ten generally permeating factors, the six defiled permeating 
factors, and the two neutral factors. Unobstructed neutral awareness 
is associated with the fewest number of factors--twelve, including the 
ten generally permeating factors and the two neutral factors. 
Sleepiness may appear in any thought. 

32.(E393a) Certain mental factors require further clarification. 
Shamelessness and disregard can be distinguished from one another 
in various ways: shamelessness is lack of respect for good qualities, or 
for those who possess them, while disregard means lack of remorse 
with regard to manifest vices. Or, shamelessness is lack of aversion to 
one's own defilements, while disregard is lack of aversion to evil 
conduct. Or, shamelessness leads to displaying vices alone, while 
disregard leads to displaying vices in public. Or, shamelessness is not 
reconsidering the cause of one's actions, while disregard is not 
reconsidering its effects. Faith is affection that is not defiled, that is to 
say, it is not attachment. 

33.(E393c) Objection: Initial and sustained thought are not actual 
entities different from awareness, but are merely varieties of 
awareness itself. Further, even if they are different from awareness, 
since they are mutually contradictory they should not be present in the 
same moment of thought. 

Answer: This interpretation is not correct. Initial and sustained 
thought are indeed actual entities distinct from thought. Even though 
they are present in one moment of thought, their activities 
predominate at different times. For example, in a gross moment of 
thought because the activity of initial thought predominates, the 
activity of sustained thought is difficult to discern; both do not 
predominate in the same moment. Others claim that initial thought 
acts as the gross obstruction of thought preventing the attainment of 
the intermediate state between the first and second trance states. 
Sustained thought acts as the subtle obstruction of awareness 
preventing the attainment of the second trance state. Since their 


684 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


activities are distinct, they must exist as actual entities. The upper 
tance states do not have initial and sustained thought and no 
difference of grossness or subtleness; therefore they are said to be of 
one flavor. ; - 
Pride is asserting one's superiority over others due to an inflated 

estimation of one's own thoughts, while conceit is attachment to one's 
own qualities, which causes exhaustion. That is to say, due to the 
exhaustion caused by arrogant thoughts attached to themselves one 
withdraws from the pursuit of good factors. e 

7 34.(E394c) The difference in terminology between citta, manas and 
vijfiana has been explained from a number of perspectives For 
example, citta collects together (cinoti), manas considers (manute) 
and vijfidna cognizes (vijanati). Or, the three terms are used in the 
element, sense basis, and aggregate classifications respectively. 

Accompanying mental factors and awarenesses are said to share a 

locus, that is, they are based on one of the six sense organs; share a 
supporting object, that is, one of the objects becomes their supporting 
object; share an aspect, that is, they have the same features in grasping 
supporting objects and are connected because they are equivalent and 
simultaneous. This equivalence of awareness and mental factors is 
fivefold: of locus, supporting object, features, time of arising and 
passing away, and substantial nature. "Equivalence of substantial 
nature" means that only one awareness and one instance of each 
category of mental factors can be produced in any given moment 

Srilata: There is only awareness. There are no separate mental 
factors because even if, for example, awareness and a mental factor 
were simultaneous, a distinction between them on the basis of aspects 
1s not possible. How can you justify your claim that aspects reside in 
mental factors and not in awareness? Further, numerous scriptural 
Passages demonstrate that these supposedly associated mental factors 
are not distinct from awareness. 

Answer: Since awareness and mental factors share the same 
content, arise and pass away simultaneously, and share the same 
moral quality, their distinction in essential nature is difficult to discern. 
I, however, distinguish them as follows: perceptual consciousness 
apprehends the nature of its object in general; mental factors grasp the 
various particular characteristics of the object. The existence of 
awareness and mental factors as distinct actual entities can also be 
Proven through numerous scriptural Passages. The scripture clearly 


NYAYANUSARA 685 


states that the three mental factors of feelings, identifications, and 
thinkings arise simultaneously with contact, which is produced 
through the collocation of the sense-organ, the supporting object, and 
perceptual consciousness. Since perceptual consciousness or 
awareness and the mental factor of feelings and so on are mentioned 
separately, they must refer to two distinct actual entities. Further, it 
cannot be maintained that awareness in the form of perceptual 
consciousness first apprehends the essential nature of the object and 
then, in the next moment, another awareness in the form of an 
identification grasps its particular characteristics. In this subsequent 
moment the object has already passed away. How could identification 
grasp its particular characteristics? As the scriptural passage indicates, 
the mental factor of identification arises simultaneously with 
awareness or perceptual consciousness, not subsequent to it. If these 
mental factors were of the nature of awareness itself, more than one 
perceptual consciousness would arise within one moment--a 
conclusion that cannot be accepted. Though mental factors share the 
same time of arising and passing away, the locus, supporting object, 
and form with awareness itself, they have their own particular 
activities. Therefore, they can be known to exist as distinct actual 
entities. 
35-36a.(E396c) There are also factors among the conditioning 
factors dissociated from awareness and material form that necessarily 
arise simultaneously with other factors. There are fourteen such 
dissociated forces: possession, nonpossession, homogeneity, 
nonidentification, the nonidentification trance, the cessation trance, 
vitality, the four conditioning characteristics, duration, aging and 
termination, the collections of words, of phrases, and of syllables. 
These dissociated forces are conditioned, but are not awarenesses, 
mental factors, or material form. 
36b-d.(E397-399) Possession (prapti) is of two types: (1) the 
possession of that which has never been attained, which is called 
acquisition, and (2) the possession of that which has already been 
attained, which is called accompaniment. Similarly nonpossession is 
of two types: (1) the nonpossession of that.which has never been 
attained, and (2) the nonpossession of that which has been attained 
and lost. Among conditioned factors, one has possession and 
nonpossession only of those factors that fall within one's own life- 
stream. Among the unconditioned factors, one has possession and 


686 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


nonpossession only of the two cessations, and not of space. 

Vasubandhu: How do we know that possession exists as a distinct 
entity? 

Answer: Scriptural passages can be cited that refer to possession. 
We can thereby infer that it exists as a distinct actual entity. 

Vasubandhu: It is unjustified to posit the existence of possession 
because its essential nature cannot be perceived, as in the face of form 
or sound, and its activity cannot be inferred, as in the case of the eyes 
or ears. 

Answer: Possession does indeed have activity, namely, it prevents 
the loss of factors that have been obtained and itis the marker for the 
knowledge that this belongs to that. 

Vasubandhu: These activities are performed by seeds within the 
corporeal basis. When the seed-nature of a given factor is not 
damaged, or when one has mastery with regard to the arising of a 
factor, one can be said to have accompaniment of that factor. 
Nonpossession refers to the opposite case. For example when the seeds 
of good factors are damaged, or one does not have mastery with 
regard to their arising, or when the seeds of bad or neutral factors have 
been eradicated by the path, or when there is no effort which can 


ee their present operation, one is said to have nonpossession of 
em. 


Answer: What is this that is given the name "seed"? 

Vasubandhu: Seeds are name and form, or the five aggregates, that 
have the capability, either remotely or directly, to produce their own 
effect; this capability becomes effective as a distinctive characteristic 
in the transformation of the life-stream. This "transformation of the 
life-stream" is the change in the stream of conditioned factors having 
the nature of cause and effect. This "distinctive characteristic" is the 
capability to produce an effect immediately. That is to say, a particular 
capability, referred to as a seed, arises in a succeeding awareness 
distinguished by the distinctive characteristic of that preceding 
moment of thought. Future effects originate through this distinctive 
characteristic in the transformation of the life-stream. For example 
even within a good awareness there lies a bad capability, or seed, 
Projected by a previous bad awareness: this seed will produce its bad 
effect either remotely or directly. 


Answer: Is this seed an entity separate from the momentary 
awareness in which it is found? 


NYAYANUSARA 687 


Vasubandhu: It is not entirely separate. 

Answer: This seed, whether good or bad, should then produce the 
same effect as the awareness in which it is found. However, factors of 
differing moral quality must be distinct entities. Therefore, the seed 
and the awareness in which it is found must be distinct. 

Next, how would the preceding awareness and the particular 
capability within the succeeding awareness function as cause and 
effect? 

Vasubandhu: It is the nature of factors to function as cause and 
effect: that is to say, from the preceding awareness the succeeding 
capability is produced; if there were no preceding awareness the 
succeeding capability would not arise. This principle defines a cause 
and effect relation. 

Answer: Since Vasubandhu rejects the existence of factors in the 
past and future, when the preceding awareness exists the succeeding 
seed does not yet exist. When the succeeding seed is produced, the 
preceding awareness has already passed away. A causal relation 
cannot be established between an existent and nonexistent entity. 

Therefore, this theory of seeds proposed by the Darstantika should 
be rejected. Likewise, all such theories of subsidiary elements, traces, 
capabilities, growth, or nondisappearance, which are simply other 
names for seeds, are rejected. 

37-39b.(E398c) The character of possession generally agrees with 
the character of the factor to which it applies. For example, good, bad, 
and neutral factors are acquired by good, bad, and neutral possession 
respectively. Or, factors belonging to one of the three realms are 
acquired by possession belonging to that realm. However, good and 
bad factors belonging to any of the three time periods each have 
possessions belonging to any of the three time periods. 

39c-40.(E399a) The character of nonpossession, however, generally 
does not depend upon the character of the factor to which it applies. 
For example, the moral quality of all nonpossessions is unobstructed 
and neutral, regardless of the moral quality of the factor to which it 
applies. Or, factors belonging to any of the three realms may have a 
nonpossession belonging to any of the three realms. Past and future 
factors may have a nonpossession belonging to any of the three time 
periods. However, since the possession and nonpossession of the same 
factor cannot operate simultaneously, a present factor, whose 
possession is, by definition, in operation, has only past and future 


688 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


nonpossession. 

There is no noncontaminating nonpossession. Accordingly, the 
nonpossession of noncontaminating factors that constitute the noble 
path is not noncontaminating in itself. The nonpossession of 
noncontaminating factors is defined in the scripture as the nature of an 
ordinary person. If this nonpossession of noncontaminating factors 
were, itself, a noncontaminating factor, this nature of an ordinary 
person would also be noncontaminating. 

Vasubandhu: This "nature of an ordinary person" is not an actual 
entity, but rather refers simply to a life-stream of the corporeal basis 
that has not yet produced the noble factors of the path. 

Answer: Since Vasubandhu accepts the existence of present factors 
alone, the term "stream" can have no meaning for him. Further, when 
this "nature of an ordinary person" is discarded and one becomes a 
noble one through the arising of the first noncontaminating factor, 
one's stream of the corporeal basis is still characterized by factors such 
as the sense-organs and so on that are of the same nature as those of 
an ordinary person. How then can this "nature of an ordinary person" 
be defined as the stream of factors comprising the corporeal basis? 

Objection: If it is claimed that there exists a "nature of an ordinary 
person" apart from the corporeal basis of an ordinary person, then 
there should also be a "jar-nature" that exists apart from the material 
components of the jar. 

Answer: In the case of the jar one cannot discard this supposed "jar- 
nature" without breaking the material jar. However, in the case of an 
ordinary person, when the first noncontaminating factor arises, one 
discards the nature of an ordinary person even though the corporeal 
basis is as it was previously. Therefore, the example of the jar is not 
pertinent. 

Objection: This "nature of an ordinary person" should be defined as 
the possession of ordinary or contaminating factors and not the 
nonpossession of noble, noncontaminating factors. 

Answer: If these ordinary factors belonged to ordinary persons 
alone and were possessed by ordinary persons everywhere, they could 
be considered to be the nature of an ordinary person. However, neither 
of these conditions can be fulfilled: certain noble ones possess ordinary 
factors, such as vitality, and certain ordinary factors, such as an evil 
rebirth, are not possessed by ordinary persons everywhere. 

Objection: The homogeneous character of ordinary persons fulfills 


NYAYANUSARA 689 


these two conditions, and should therefore be the nature of an 
ordinary person. 

Answer: This homogeneous character simply causes the mutual 
similarity of the body, appearance, and so on, of sentient beings ina 
particular group. The nature of an ordinary person acts as the cause of 
those contaminating factors belonging to an ordinary person, which 
prevent the acquisition of noncontaminating factors. 

Objection: These contaminating factors are produced by previous 
action and defilements; what activity would this nature of an ordinary 
person have in producing them? 

Answer: Certain factors are capable of causing other factors only in 
dependence upon still other factors. For example, even though the 
sense organs are produced from previous actions and defilements, they 
also depend for their operation upon the four great material elements. 
Therefore, contaminating factors can be said to depend upon the 
nature of an ordinary person in addition to previous action and 
defilements. 

By these arguments, this "nature of an ordinary person" is 
unequivocally established. 

The nonpossession of a particular factor is discarded when one 
acquires that factor, or when one passes to another stage. Specifically, 
a nonpossession is discarded by abandoning the possession of that 
nonpossession, and by producing the nonpossession of that prior 
nonpossession. There is no fault of infinite regress in this theory of 
possessions and nonpossessions because a given factor arises together 
with two other factors: its possession and the possession of that 
possession (praptipraptt). Since possession and the possession of that 
possession establish one another, there is no fault of infinite regress. 
In the case of nonpossession, infinite regress is avoided because the 
nonpossession of the nonpossession of a particular factor never arises 
together with its nonpossession. 

41a.(E400a) Homogeneity is the uniformity or mutual similarity 
among sentient beings. It is the cause of the mutual similarity of body, 
appearance, the faculties, modes of activity, types of sustenance, or 
aspirations of beings born in a certain destiny, and so on. These 
similarities among beings in one group and distinctions from beings of 
other groups cannot be caused by previous action alone. 

Homogeneity is found only among sentient beings, not among 
insentient objects like plants. There are innumerable varieties of 


690 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


homogeneity in accordance with distinctions in realm, destiny, type of 
birth, stage, body and so on. Further, there is homogeneity of factors 
belonging to sentient beings in accordance with the aggregate or 
element classifications, and so on. 

The homogeneity of a particular category of sentient beings is 
discarded when one enters a state contradictory to it. For example, the 
homogeneity of the state of an ordinary person is discarded when one 
first attains a noncontaminating factor and becomes a noble one. 

Vasubandhu: Since homogeneity has no material form, it cannot be 
known by direct perception. How then can its activity of determining 
categories of things be known? 

Answer: Its activity can be observed in any grouping of similar 
factors belonging to sentient beings. 

Vasubandhu: Why do you not allow that there is homogeneity also 
of insentient objects? 

Answer: Insentient objects are without mutual similarity in modes 
of activity and aspirations. Further, homogeneity is caused by actions 
in a previous life, or zealous effort in the present life. Plants neither 
exert activity nor have aspirations and therefore cannot be said to have 
acommon lot. 

Vasubandhu: Since a common lot enables the cognition of mutual 
similarity among distinct entities, and the various types of common lot 
are distinguished from one another, there must then also be a general 
category of homogeneity enabling the concept of homogeneity in 
general. 

Answer: Homogeneity does not act as the cause of the cognition of 
mutual similarity; this cognition is derived from the observation of 
particular instances. No further "homogeneity" is required to support 
this general concept. Rather, homogeneity acts as the cause that 
produces similar categories of things. 

Srilata: This homogeneity is identical to the category of universals 
proposed by the Vaigesika school. 

Answer: If the Vaisesika school maintained that this "universal" is 
not singular, is momentary, and is distinct from the object to which it 
applies, we could accept their opinion with no major objection. 

41b-d.(E400c) Nonideation is that cessation of awareness and 
associated factors attained by those reborn among the gods who are 
without ideation; these gods are found in the fourth trance state in the 
realm of form. This factor, "nonideation", is exclusively the karmically 


NYAYANUSARA 691 


matured effect of the nonideation trance. The other conditioned 
factors of these beings without ideation are the effect of both the 
nonideation trance and the fourth trance state, or the fourth trance 
state alone. Even though those born among the gods without ideation 
have awareness before entering and after emerging from the 
nonideation trance, this factor of nonideation obstructs the arising of 
future thought and thought concomitants for a long period of time. 
Sentient beings fall from this region of gods without ideation through 
the arising of ideation, which occurs when the force of the life-span 
produced by the previously cultivated nonideation trance has been 
exhausted. They are then reborn in the realm of desire due to their past 
action. 

42.(E401a) The nonideation trance, like nonideation, is a distinct 
actual entity that obstructs the arising of awareness and associated 
factor. It arises for those who are detached from the desires of the third 
level of trance in the material realm. "Trance" means either 
accomplishing (apatti) correctly (sama), or else bringing awarenesses 
or the four great material elements into a state of equable (samata) 
operation. Though all awarenesses and mental factors are 
extinguished, this trance is referred to simply as the nonideation trance 
because one produces it through aversion specifically to ideation. The 
state of nonideation is mistakenly considered by ordinary persons and 
non-Buddhists to be the true liberation, and the nonideation trance is 
considered to be the path of deliverance. Therefore it is not to be 
practised by those noble ones on the true path. This nonideation trance 
acts as a cause of karmic maturation, and its effects, including rebirth 
in the state of nonideation, are received in the next lifetime. 

43.(E401b) The cessation trance is a distinct actual entity that 
obstructs the arising of awareness and mental factors. It arises after 
one has abandoned desires in the basis of nothingness, which is the 
third meditative base in the immaterial realm. It then arises in the 
fourth base of neither-ideation-nor-nonideation, which is the summit 
of existence. This cessation trance is produced merely with an 
intention to abide tranquilly, and not to seek deliverance. Further, it 
can only arise after one abandons all defilements that are to be 
abandoned by the path of vision. Therefore, it is to be produced by 
noble ones practising the path, and not ordinary persons. It acts as the 
cause of maturation of the four aggregates within the summit of 
existence, which may be received in the next lifetime, the third 


692 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


lifetime, or not at all. If after one has given rise to this trance in a lower 
state one then enters nirvana without being reborn in the summit of 
existence, its effects are not received. This cessation trance is attained 
only through application and not by mere detachment. However, even 
though a Bodhisattva attains cessation trance he does not, in the 
practice of the noble path, actually enter it prior to attaining 
enlightenment. A Bodhisattva attains enlightenment in thirty-four 
consecutive moments of practice, which cannot be interrupted by a 
moment of a dissimilar category. Therefore, this process of 
noncontaminating moments of the path cannot be interrupted by a 
contaminating moment of this equipoise. 

44c-d.(E402b) These two types of trance without awareness will 
occur to one supported by a corporeal basis in either the realm of 
desire or the material realm. One who has been reborn in the 
immaterial realm cannot enter the cessation trance because there is no 
corporeal basis to support the trance in that realm. Vitality necessarily 
proceeds in dependence upon either material form or awareness. If 
one who had been reborn in the immaterial realm were to enter the 
cessation trance, neither material form nor awareness would be 
present and vitality would be abandoned. 

Objection: If all awarenesses and mental factors are extinguished in 
this cessation trance, why is it also referred to as the trance involving 
only the cessation of identification and feelings? 

Answer: One produces this trance by opposition specifically to those 
two because they are capable of forming the basis of wrong views and 
desires. 

Darstantika: In this cessation trance one only extinguishes 
identifications and feelings, not all awarenesses. Four reasons can be 
given for this: (1) there are no sentient beings who are completely 
without awareness; (2) there must be a distinction between this 
cessation trance and death; (3) scriptural passages state that 
perceptual consciousness is not separated from the body; and (4) one's 
life-force, warmth, and perceptual consciousness are never separated 
from one another. 

Answer: This interpretation is unreasonable because no 
awarenesses and mental factors occur without identifications and 
feelings. As the scripture states: "Visual perceptual consciousness arises 
in dependence upon the eye and material form. Contact results from 
the collocation of these three factors. Feelings, identifications and 


NYAYANUSARA 693 


volitions arise together with contact." Therefore, feelings and 
identifications necessarily arise when there is perceptual 
consciousness. The successive model would contradict the definitions 
of "awareness" and "associated mental factor" (see 2.34). 

Now in response to the four reasons offered by the Darstantika, first, 
the existence of sentient beings without awareness is verified by 
scriptural references. Second, those who have entered cessation trance 
are not dead because they still have vitality. Sentient beings may lack 
material form, as in the immaterial realm, or they may lack awareness, 
as in these states of trance without awareness. Third, these scriptural 
passages state that awareness is not separated from the body simply 
because awareness will be produced again in the body that serves as 
the corporeal basis after emerging from this trance. Fourth, the life- 
force, warmth, and perceptual consciousness are indeed separated 
from one another only in certain cases. For example, in the immaterial 
realm there is no warmth; similarly in the states of trance without 
awareness there is no perceptual consciousness. 

The duration of the cessation trance is determined by the extent of 
its force, which depends upon the degree of application through which 
it is produced. The moment of thought just prior to the trance acts as 
the directly antecedent condition for the arising of thought upon 
emerging from it. 

Vasubandhu: This cessation trance has no activity, and therefore is 
not an actual entity. Awareness is obstructed not by the cessation 
trance itself, but by awareness in the moment just prior to entering this 
trance. This awareness arises opposed to other moments of awareness, 
and it brings about a corporeal basis opposed to the arising of other 
moments of awareness. This mere nonproceeding of awarenesses is 
then provisionally referred to as trance. This nominally designated 
trance can be included among conditioned factors because it does not 
exist either before entering or after emerging from it. Since the 
corporeal basis and awareness contain each others’ seeds, awareness 
arises upon emerging from this trance from seeds of awareness within 
the corporeal basis. 

Answer: Why then does perceptual consciousness not always arise 
merely from these seeds within the corporeal basis? Further, what 
would prevent the simultaneous arising of more than one perceptual 
consciousness, one supported by seeds in the corporeal basis, and the 
other supported by the previous moment of perceptual consciousness? 


694 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


It is unreasonable to assume that, in ordinary circumstances, 
perceptual consciousness arises on the basis of a prior moment of 
perceptual consciousness, but upon emerging from the cessation 
trance it arises from the corporeal basis. Further, if the seeds of the 
directly antecedent awareness lie in the corporeal basis, suppressing 
the seeds of other awarenesses during trance, what cause enables 
these other seeds to produce awareness after emerging from trance? 
Then, in ordinary states also thought should be produced from these 
seeds within the body. Further, even if this trance is merely nominal, 
it can only exist if supported by an actual entity. What would this 
actually existing basis be other than this distinct factor, the cessation 
trance? Further, if this trance were merely the nonproceeding of 
moments of awareness, it would have nonexistence as its nature, and 
it should not then be included among conditioned factors. Therefore, 
it should be clear that the moment of awareness immediately prior to 
trance is not capable of obstructing other awarenesses. There must 
then be another separate factor with this capability, namely, the 
cessation trance. 

45a-b.(E404b) Vitality is life-force, which serves as the support of 
warmth and perceptual consciousness, and enables the continuance of 
the life-stream of sentient beings. This life-force is supported by 
previous action and proceeds uninterrupted for the period of one 
lifetime. 

Vasubandhu: This life-force does not exist as an actual entity; it is 
merely the momentum of the period of continued successive arising of 
the corporeal basis and six sense-organs, which is determined in 
accordance with the force of previous actions. 

Answer: When, for example, one is reborn in the immaterial realm, 
the five externally directed sense-organs are absent, or when one 
enters a state without thought, the sixth mental sense-organ is not 
produced, or when one produces a moment of awareness of differing 
moral quality, the momentum of the continued successive arising of 
the corporeal basis and six sense organs is interrupted. In these cases 
there is no momentum of a continued successive arising of the 
corporeal basis. To what then would the life-force or vitality refer? 

The life-force is projected by action in a previous life and proceeds 
in dependence upon homogeneity in the present life. Death may result 
from the exhaustion of the force of those actions that have vitality as 
their matured effect; or from the exhaustion of those meritorious 


y 


NYAYANUSARA 695 


actions that have property as their matured effect; or from the 
exhaustion of both; or from unfavorable circumstances. For those 
sentient beings in the realm of desire who do not enter the two trance 
states without awareness, their life-force proceeds in dependence upon 
their life-stream. There is then the possibility of obstruction of the life- 
force; when their corporeal basis is damaged, their vitality is also 
damaged. There is then, for sentient beings in the first category, the 
possibility of untimely death. For all other sentient beings, the life- 
force continues in its successive arising having arisen once, without 
obstruction. 

45c.(E405c) The four conditioning characteristics indicate the 
conditioned nature of all conditioned factors. They include birth, 
duration, aging, and termination. Birth acts as the predominant cause 
of the nonobstruction of the production of conditioned factors; it 
draws out the conditioned factors from the remote future, enabling 
their immediate production. Duration acts as the predominant cause 
of the nonobstruction of the present activity of conditioned factors 
through which they draw out their own effect. Aging is the cause of the 
fact that previous moments differ from later ones. Termination acts as 
the predominant cause of the destruction of the activity of conditioned 
factors. 

46a-b.(E406a) Objection: Since these four characteristics are 
themselves conditioned factors, they should each have four additional 
conditioning characteristics of birth, and so on. Would there not then 
be a fault of infinite regress? 

Answer: There are also four secondary characteristics, the birth of 
birth, duration of duration, and so on, each of which carries out its 
function on its own respective characteristic. That is to say, each of the 
primary characteristics carry out their functions on eight factors: the 
four secondary characteristics, the other three primary characteristics, 
and the factor which they all characterize. However, no factor can 
function with regard to itself. Therefore the secondary characteristics 
carry out their function on only one factor, their respective primary 
characteristic. There is, then, no fault of infinite regress. These nine 
factors, comprising the four primary conditioning characteristics, the 
four secondary conditioning characteristics and the characterized 
conditioned factor arise and pass away together. 

Vasubandhu: There is no instrument of knowledge, whether direct 
perception, inference, or scriptural authority, through which the 


696 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


existence of these characteristics as actual entities can be proved. 

Answer: Is there then some instrument of knowledge through which 
their existence as nominally true can be prcved? If Vasubandhu denies 
both their actual and nominal existence, they must be absolutely 
nonexistent because there is no third form of existence. The nominal 
existence of these characteristics cannot be proved for the following 
reasons: (1) unlike a jar, they cannot be directly perceived; (2) no 
scriptural passage asserts their nominal existence; and (3) if their 
nominal existence were proved by inference, their actual existence 
could also be proved by inference. In any case, the existence of these 
conditioned characteristics as actual entities is proven by scriptural 
authority: as the scripture states, "There are three conditioning 
characteristics of conditioned factors; their arising, passing away, and 
change in continuance also can be known." This passage, by repeating 
the word "conditioned", clearly indicates that the conditioning 
characteristics actually exist apart from the conditioned factor that 
they characterize. 

Vasubandhu: This passage simply indicates that the series of 
conditioned factors is conditioned or dependently originated. These 
conditioning characteristics as applied to one moment cannot be 
cognized. Therefore, they must apply to the conditioning of the stream 
as a whole, and not to a single moment. The purpose of this passage is 
to undermine any belief in a permanent self. The beginning of the 
stream is birth, its extinction is termination, the proceeding of the 
stream is continuance, and the distinction between former and later 
moments in the stream is senescence. 

Answer: This single birth and termination of an individual life- 
stream is commonly recognized, and yet belief in a lasting self is still 
prevalent. Therefore, the purpose of this passage must be to make 
known the birth and termination of each moment within the stream, 
and thereby undermine any false belief in a self. This scriptural 
passage is presented precisely because these conditioning 
characteristics as applied to each moment cannot be directly 
perceived. These conditioning characteristics can, however, be known 
through subtle discriminative intellect that examines the 
uninterrupted succession of moments within a given stream. 

Vasubandhu: In the previous scriptural passage the repeated word 
"conditioned" merely indicates that the nature of conditioned factors 
is conditioned; it does not indicate the separate actual existence of 


NYAYANUSARA 697 


these characteristics from the factor characterized. 

‘Answer: Vasubandhu contradicts his own position. Since he 
maintains that conditioned factors do not exist in the future, when 
they are about to be produced, birth must indicate not only the 
production, but also the existence of such conditioned factors. 
Vasubandhu maintains that birth is merely the fact of a conditioned 
factor acquiring its own nature; birth must also then indicate that a 
given factor exists. 

Next, what is this stream to which Vasubandhu refers? 

Vasubandhu: This stream exists only provisionally; mutually similar 
moments are interconnected through a relation of cause and effect in 
which conditioned factors proceed in succession without termination. 

Answer: In that case, it is not reasonable to apply birth to the stream 
as a whole since the conditioned factors of which the stream consists 
do not arise at the same time. Duration cannot be applied to the stream 
of conditioned factors as a whole since these numerous moments of 
conditioned factors never abide at the same time. If "aging" merely 
refers provisionally to the change between former and later moments 
in the stream, a cause for this apparent change must be found. 
Granted, at times this change can be explained through the activity of 
external conditions; but there are cases in which apparent change 
occurs without a corresponding change in external conditions. In this 
case, an internal cause of change must be found. Finally, if termination 
is merely the extinction of the stream, it must take the nonexistence of 
conditioned factors as its nature. And since conditioned factors are 
often said to be impermanent, or have this termination as their nature, 
they must all be nonexistent by nature. 

Vasubandhu: If these conditioning characteristics are not assumed 
to exist as actual entities, they could be interpreted as belonging to 
conditioned factors in each moment. Birth would refer to the fact that 
a factor exists, not having existed, and termination to the fact that 
having existed it no longer exists. Duration would be the connection 
between previous and later moments, and aging the change in that 
connection. 

Answer: Through this admission Vasubandhu falls prey to the same 
criticism he levels against us. That is to say, one factor in one moment 
is produced, abides, decays, and is destroyed. Since it is not admitted 
that these four characteristics are actual entities distinct from the 
factor that they characterize, their functions must then be mere aspects 


698 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of that characterized factor. Then what would prevent this single 
factor from undergoing all four of its aspects at once? In any case, 
distinctions in the capability of one factor in one moment are 
impossible. Only if one allows that the conditioning characteristics of 
birth and so on exist as actual entities, distinct from the factor that they 
characterize, can this fault be avoided. In this case, the distinct 
capabilities of production and so on-are attributed to distinct factors 
and not to the characterized factor itself. 
Conditioned factors can be said to exist in several different states. 
In the past and future, they exist as essential nature, which may or may 
not be associated with capability. In the present, they exist as essential 
nature that is necessarily associated with a function. This function 
refers to the predominant capability of a factor in projecting its own 
effect. "Capability" refers to the subordinate capability of assisting 
factors of a different category in the projection of their effect. These 
four conditioning characteristics function as capabilities that assist the 
characterized factor in the projection of its effect. Furthermore, they 
do not exert their capabilities in the same states. The characteristic of 
birth exerts its capability when both it and the characterized factor are 
still future, leading the characterized factor toward the state of having 
already been produced. The other three characteristics exert their 
capability when they and the characterized factor are present. 
Vasubandhu: Don't these three characteristics then exert their 
capabilities at one time? 
Answer: These three characteristics exert their capability separately, 
giving the characterized factor three distinct points of dependence. 
Vasubandhu: If birth performs its activity when it is future, it should 
be referred to as present, and not future. Further, when it has arisen, 
since it has already functioned, it should be referred to as past. How 
can you define the present moment as that time when a factor 
functions and yet claim that birth functions when it is future? 
Answer: Fool! You do not understand the difference between 
function and capability. The efficacy of these four characteristics has 
nothing to do with functioning. For example, a present eye in the dark 
does not function in assisting visual perceptual consciousness to arise; 
nonetheless, its function of projecting its own effect, or acting as the 
homogeneous cause in the arising of a subsequent eye, is performed. 
Similarly, these four characteristics exert only capability in assisting 
the characterized factor to arise. Therefore, birth may exert this 


NYAYANUSARA 699 


capability when it is still future. 

Vasubandhu: Even if birth, duration and termination are accepted, 
aging can in no way be applied to one moment. Since aging is defined 
as change or the distinction between former and later moments, if this 
is applied to one factor we must admit that this factor, within one 
moment, becomes something other than itself. ; 

Answer: Aging refers to the degeneration of the present function of 
the characterized factor, but not of the factor's essential nature. When 
a future factor, already existing as essential nature, encounters the 
power of previously produced or simultaneous conditions, its 
distinctive activity arises, and that factor becomes present. This 
produced functioning is able to project its effect through the assistance 
of continuance, and this projection of its effect degenerates through 
the assistance of aging. 

Vasubandhu: If the function of a factor undergoes change, the 
factor itself must also change in essential nature. 

Answer: As you maintain in your theory of seeds, these seeds or 
traces and the moment of thought in which they are found can neither 
be said to be identical nor completely different. The same is true of the 
function or capability and essential nature of conditioned factors. 
Further, since we maintain that a factor exists as essential nature in the 
past and future, when the present functioning of a factor ceases the 
factor merely abandons the present; the factor, however, still exists as 
essential nature. Therefore, a function may degenerate without a 
corresponding degeneration of essential nature. For you, Vasubandhu, 
who claims that a factor exists for one present moment only and does 
not admit aging within that moment, how is change in any sense 
possible? 

Finally, aging can also be understood as that cause in each moment 
which produces degeneration in the subsequent state of the effect; in 
this way every moment in a stream of conditioned factors causes a 
later moment to change. 

46c-d.(E411a) Vasubandhu: If birth in its future state produces an 
existent factor, since this productive cause and that which is to be 
produced are always provided, why are future factors not all produced 
together? 

Answer: Birth alone, apart from a complete collocation of other 
causes and conditions, is not capable of producing a factor that is to be 
produced. 


700 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Vasubandhu: In that case we observe only the productive capability 
of these other causes and conditions, and not that of this characteristic 
of birth. 

Answer: If you maintain that a mere collocation of causes and 
conditions produces the effect, with no cause as predominant, then the 
effect should be produced even if one cause or condition is lacking. 
Further, even though the efficacy of a particular cause is not observed, 
we cannot deny that this cause is effective. For example, the four great 
material elements serve as causes in the production of the visual sense- 
organ even though their efficacy is not observed. Further, you suggest 
karmic seeds of action as causes for transformations in the life-stream 
and also claim that these seeds produce their effects through the 
assistance of other conditions. Why then do you reject this 
characteristic of birth simply because it avails itself of various other 
conditions? 

Srilata: Conditioned factors are without continuance because if they 
were to abide for even the shortest period of time why would they not 
then abide for a much longer period? 

Answer: If conditioned factors did not abide for even the shortest 
period of one moment, they would be absolutely nonexistent. You, 
Srilata, maintain that conditioned factors are destroyed immediately 
after they have acquired their nature. Must they not then abide while 
they are acquiring this nature? This is precisely the time when 
continuance enables that conditioned factor to exert its activity and 
Project its effect. We also would not claim that its activity abides after 
this moment. 

Srilata: If the characteristic of impermanence exists apart from the 
conditioned factors that are impermanent, why is there not also a 
characteristic of frustration apart from the fact of frustrations? 

Answer: You have confused the conditioning characteristic of 
termination under discussion here with the nature of all conditioned 
factors as impermanent. Conditioned factors are by their very nature 
impermanent, but they are destroyed with the characteristic of 
termination as the cause. Even you would admit that conditioned 
factors, which are impermanent by nature, are produced due to certain 

causes. Why then do you deny that they also have a cause of 
destruction? 

Srilata: Causation is necessarily successive; the productive cause 
precedes its effect. If destruction were also caused, a succession of the 


NYAYANUSARA 701 


destructive cause and its subsequent effect would be required. The 
momentariness of all conditioned factors would thereby be violated. 

Answer: Productive causes can either precede or be simultaneous 
with their effect. Similarly, the cause of destruction can be 
simultaneous with its effect. As the scriptures state, "everything has a 
cause"; therefore, destruction must also have a cause. 

47ab.(E412c) "Collection of words" refers to the collection of 
identifications. Identifications grasp a factor through conceptual 
construction, and names, issued from syllables, correspond to these 
ideas. Names are manifested by sound and are then able to manifest 
the object. They are commonly established specifications that indicate 
both the intention of the speaker and the essential nature of the object 
that is known. "Collection of phrases" refers to the collection of 
sentences. A sentence is an explication, which brings the desired 
meaning to completion. Phrases are able to explicate, from both a 
cursory and detailed perspective, the object-referent in terms of its 
distinctive characteristics. "Collection of syllables" is the collection of 
phonemes such as a, 4G, or ka, kha and so on. Syllables cause an 
utterance to be remembered by the speaker after the sound has passed 
away, maintaining this utterance without doubt, and allowing it to be 
transmitted to another. Both name and phrase have their origin in 
syllables. 

Question: Are objects called forth directly by uttering their names? 

Answer: Obviously not, for uttering the name "fire" does not burn 
the tongue, and so on. 

Question: Then how is one's understanding of any word not a 
misunderstanding? 

Answer: The relationship between words or ideas and the objects 
referred to is established provisionally by consensus at the beginning 
of each world cycle. These words are then handed down and used 
conventionally. Others suggest that utterances refer to the object 
indirectly because speech issues forth a word, and a word manifests 
the object. There exists no factor that is without a name. If there were, 
that factor would not be known. How then could it be said to exist? 

Vasubandhu: Word, phrase and syllable have speech as their 
essential nature, and therefore should be included among factors of 
material form, not among those factors that are dissociated from 
material form and thought. 

Answer: Numerous scriptural passages indicate that these three, 


702 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


word, phrase, and syllable, are distinct from sound. Logical arguments 
may also be offered. One may hear sound and not understand the 
phoneme, as when one does not understand the object-referent to 
which the sound refers. Or, one may understand the phoneme without 
hearing the sound, as when one reads lips. Or, one can understand the 
name of an object-referent through odor, and so on. Therefore, word 
must be distinct from sound. Sound, phoneme, word and the object 
exist separately in successive dependence. The distinctions within 
intelligible sound depend upon phonemes, and these phonemes 
combine in a particular order to produce name. This name alone is 
able to manifest the object. 

Vasubandhu: Speech is not mere sound, but rather only articulated 
sound that refers to object. Since a word only manifests the object 
through speech, why imagine that the word exists distinct from 
speech? 

Answer: Certain phonemes are established in common with regard 
to certain objects. Words that specify the object are then evolved from 
these phonemes. When speakers are about to speak, they must first 
reflect upon these specifying words in order to understand the object 
indicated in their own speech, or in that of others. Therefore, the 
object can only be indicated through this succession from sound to 
word; each component has a distinct function in the process, and 
therefore exists. 

Vasubandhu: If we assume that syllables actually exist, words and 
phrases are only collections of these syllables; they would not exist as 
distinct actual entities, Further, a name can consist of a single 
phoneme. What would the difference between a word and a phoneme 
be in this case? 

Answer: This interpretation is untenable because there is no one 
moment in which the syllables of a name operate simultaneously. In 
the case of a word consisting of a single phoneme, this phoneme alone 
is without meaning; it acquires meaning only when it serves as the 
condition for the arising of a word. Further, if sound or speech alone 
were able to specify an object, any grouping of articulated sounds 
should specify the object; or, a particular grouping of sounds should 
have the ability to specify an object without being established by prior 
common consensus. 

Vasubandhu: Indeed, the various syllables of which a word consists 
cannot be uttered in one moment, and a single factor cannot be 


NYAYANUSARA 703 


produced part by part. How then would the string of syllables of which 
a word consists be able to produce it? If you respond that the last 
syllable of a word, which depends upon the previous syllables, 
produces a word, that last syllable alone should be sufficient to 
produce the word. : 

Answer: Since you reject the existence of past factors, how, in your 
view, could a string of syllables constitute one word? Further, how 
could you establish any relation of successive dependence among the 
syllables since you deny the existence of factors in the past or future? 
In that case, one would be as unable to understand a word upon 
hearing the last syllable as one was when hearing the first. Precisely 
because we accept the existence of past and future factors, aword can 
be produced by last syllable in dependence upon the previous ones. 

Srilata: People speak without recognizing these sets of words, 
phrases, and syllables as factors dissociated from thought. Why then 
should we assume that they exist? 

Answer: Certainly, we cannot conclude that simply because 
common understanding does not include awareness of the subtle 
dynamics of communication and of the actual relation of speech, word 
and object, these components do not exist! One must engage in careful 
consideration of the distinctive characteristics of factors in order to 
understand their true functioning. 

47cd.(E415c-416a) The words, etc. are connected to the realm of 
desire and the material realm. Some, claiming that word and so on 
depend upon speech, suggest that words can be found only through 
the first trance state in the material realm, above which speech is not 
found. Others claim that because a word is dependent only upon the 
existence of a body, which occurs throughout the material realm, 
words also can be found throughout that realm. Collections of words, 
etc., are indicative of sentient beings because words accompany the 
person manifesting the object and not the object itself. The collections 
of words, etc. are morally only neutral; when one utters the word for 
a good factor that word is not itself good. oe 

The other forces dissociated from thought can also be discriminated 
from various perspectives; for example, the realm to which they are 
connected, their nature as an effect, moral quality, their status as 
indicative of sentient beings, and so on. 

49.(E416b) The six kinds of causes are listed according to the extent 
of their inclusiveness. The efficient cause includes all factors, the 


704 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


simultaneous cause includes all conditioned factors, and the remaining 
causes each include a portion of conditioned factors. Though there is 
no extant scriptural passage that attests to these six causes as a group, 
numerous passages refer to each type of cause individually. These six 
types of cauces can be divided into two groups: those that arise prior 
to their effects, including the homogeneous cause, the pervasive cause, 
and the cause of maturation; and those that arise simultaneously with 
their effects, including the simultaneous cause and the associated 
cause. The efficient cause can arise either prior to or simultaneously 
with its effect. 

50a.(417a) Efficient causes are of two types: (1) those that act as 
causes of another factor simply because they do not obstruct its arising, 
and (2) those that act as productive causes of another factor. Any 
factor can function as a nonobstructing cause of all other factors with 
the exception of itself. This is due to the fact that a factor is always an 
obstruction to itself, no entity is self-caused, and no entity functions 
with regard to itself, just as a sword does not cut itself and so on. 

Objection: Something that is capable of obstructing the arising of 
another and yet does not obstruct can be a nonobstructing cause. But 
how can something that is not capable of obstructing be a 
nonobstructing cause? 

Answer: Since all factors are mutually dependent, all have the 
power of obstruction. Further, in its capacity as a nonobstructing 
cause, a factor that does not have the power of obstructing is not 
different from one that has such power but is not obstructing. 

A factor of any of the three time periods of past, present and future 
can be efficient cause for factors of the other two time periods, but only 
those factors that are simultaneous with or subsequent to an efficient 
cause can be its effect. Conditioned factors can be causes of other 
conditioned factors and can be caused by both conditioned and 
unconditioned factors. Unconditioned factors, however, are not caused 
and therefore are neither caused by one another nor by conditioned 
factors. 

Factors acting as simultaneous causes include the four great 
elements, the four conditioning characteristics and the factors they 
characterize, and thought and those factors that accompany thought. 
Hovvever, in addition to these simultaneous causes that function as 
mutual causes and therefore are also mutual effects, factors that arise 
together and share a common effect are also simultaneous causes. 


NYAYANUSARA 705 


These factors that function as simultaneous causes must be of different 
categories. 

51.(E418a) Those factors that accompany thought include thought 
concomitants, the two restraints, and the conditioning characteristics 
of awareness, mental factors, and the two restraints. A factor's status 
as accompanying thought is determined by ten criteria including 
whether or not this factor is produced at the same time or in the same 
time period as a moment of thought, whether or not it shares the same 
effect, and whether or not it is of the same moral quality. 

Objection: How is there a cause and effect relation among 
simultaneously arising factors? When factors are about to be produced, 
since they are not yet produced, they do not yet exist. At this time, how 
is it possible to speak of one factor that is able to produce and one that 
is produced? Further, since according to the definition of causal 
relations, when the cause exists the effect exists. If future factors are 
said to be able to produce, their effects should be produced at all times. 
Further, if simultaneous causes were mutually cause and effect, there 
would be no way to determine ¥. ich of two simultaneously produced 
factors is the cause and which is the effect. Finally , this simultaneous 
production of the cause with its effect is not attested by common 
examples and is contrary to accepted definitions of cause and effect. 

Answer: The definition of causal relations is twofold according to 
scripture: (1) "When A exists, B exists; when A does not exist, B does 
not exist." This refers to simultaneous causation. (2) "From the 
production of A, B is produced: when A is not produced, B will not be 
produced." This refers to successive causation. 

Objection: Then there can be no simultaneous causation, because 
a factor that causes a simultaneously arising factor must act when both 
it and its effect are in the future, and future factors do not exist. 

Answer: Though the present functioning of a future factor has not 
yet arisen, it still can be said to exist as an actual entity, and can also 
manifest causal capability. It can then be that which is able to produce 
and is produced. However, since this capability of production itself 
depends upon other requisite conditions, these future factors do not 
produce their effects at all points in the future, but rather just when 
they are on the point of arising. 

Srilata: This twofold definition of causal relations refers only to 
successive causal relations among streams, and not to simultaneous 
and successive causal relations among individual momentary factors. 


706 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Answer: Since for Srilata "existence" is identical with "production", 
this twofold definition would be redundant even if applied to streams. 
Further, since for Srilata past and future factors do not exist, if only 
successive causation is admitted, when the cause exists the effect does 
not yet exist and when the effect exists the cause has already passed 
away. Therefore, no causation at all would be possible. Further, not all 
simultaneously produced factors serve as simultaneous causes, but 
rather only those that are mutually causes and effects, or those that 
share an effect, or those that are able to produce another 
simultaneously arising factor. Abhidharma masters do not designate 
the specific cause and effect among factors that are mutually cause and 
effect; instead, all factors in a sufficient condition are mutually cause 
and effect. Finally, there are indeed attested examples of causation 
among simultaneously produced factors, such as a lamp and its light. 
One cannot claim that they arise successively, nor that they arise 
simultaneously simply because they are produced by one prior cause. 
Some factors produced by the same prior cause do not arise 
simultaneously, and other factors arise simultaneously as a result of 
different prior causes. Still others do indeed arise simultaneously due 
to the same prior causes. Therefore, the necessary simultaneous arising 
of two factors cannot be explained through an identity of prior causes. 
Other examples of simultaneous causation include the first arising of 
a noncontaminating moment of thought and its simultaneous causes, 
and the arising of an externally directed moment of perceptual 
consciousness on the basis of its simultaneous organ and object. 

Therefore, we must reject Srilata's claim that simultaneously 
produced causes, and specifically the simultaneous causes under 
discussion here, are impossible. Future factors that are just about to 
arise do have the capability of acting as causes in the simultaneous 
production of other factors. 

52-53b.(E422a.9) Homogeneous causes act to produce similar 
factors either immediately or remotely. "Similar" means of the same 
moral quality, the same category in terms of method of abandonment, 
and the same stage. 

The Darstantikas claim that material form cannot act as a 
homogeneous cause because material form is produced and 
accumulated through the assistance of sufficient conditions; but this 
is to be rejected. 

The causal relation involving homogeneous causes is sequential and 


NYAYANUSARA 707 


the homogeneous cause is always produced prior to its effect. Past 
factors can be homogeneous causes of present and future factors, and 
present factors can be homogeneous causes of future factors. Future 
factors cannot be homogeneous causes with respect to other future 
factors because there is no sequential ordering among them. 

Objection: Future factors that have become free of obstructions and 
are just on the point of being produced are prior to those that are not 
yet to be produced. Why then are they not able to function as 
homogeneous causes? 

Answer: Sequential ordering among factors is determined by their 
state, and a factor's state is determined by whether or not it has 
performed its function, i-e., has projected its own effect; this occurs 
only when a factor is in the present time period. Since future factors 
have not yet performed their function there can be no sequential 
ordering among them and they cannot be homogeneous causes. 

Though contaminating factors can only be homogeneous causes for 
factors of the same state, factors of the path that are noncontaminating 
can be homogeneous causes for another factor of an equal or superior 
stage of the path. 

Unlike causes of karmic maturation, homogeneous causes do not 
necessarily give, or complete the production of, their effects. For 
example, a perfected being may attain nirvana without receiving the 
effect of previous homogeneous causes. All causes function in a two 
stage process: first, they project or take their effect, and then they 
produce or give their effect. No cause may produce its effect without 
having first projected it; but some causes, like the homogeneous cause, 
may project their effects without then producing it. 

Unlike the directly antecedent condition, homogeneous causes may 
produce their effect immediately, remotely, or not at all. 

53c-d.(E425b) Connected causes include only awarenesses and 
mental factors. All connected causes are simultaneous causes, but 
there are simultaneous causes that are not connected causes (i.e., the 
two restraints and the conditioning characteristics). Like simultaneous 
causes, connected causes have the same effect and are simultaneous, 
but they share a fivefold equivalence (see 2.34) not necessarily shared 
by simultaneous causes. 

54a-b.(E426a) Pervasive causes are prior proclivities that serve as 
causes of later defiled factors of the same stage. Their effect may be 
either of the same or a different category of abandonment. The power 


708 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


of pervasive causes exceeds that of homogeneous causes because 
pervasive causes are able to effect factors of a category of 
abandonment different from their own. 

54c-d.(E426c) Causes of karmic maturation are contaminating 
factors that function causally by differentiating sentient beings 
according to their past actions. Only good and bad factors can act as 
causes of maturation. Noncontaminating factors cannot act as causes 
of maturation because they are not characterized by craving, and 
because they are not connected to any realm. Morally neutral factors 
are not causes of maturation because they are weak. These causes of 
maturation are of two types: projecting action, which determines the 
general character of any given lifetime, and completing action, which 
determines its specific character. 

The effect of a cause of maturation is not simultaneous, nor does it 
follow immediately; the cause of maturation requires a successive 
stream for the production of its effect. 

There are thus endless varieties of causes and one actual entity may 
act as a cause in different ways. Further, no cause acts alone, or is itself 
sufficient in the production of its effect. Thus we must examine each 
situation, in any given moment, to determine the way in which a 
particular entity acts as a cause. 

55a-b. (E428b) Concerning the time period of these various causes, 
past and present factors may function as pervasive or homogeneous 
causes, while factors of all three time periods may function as 
connected or simultaneous causes or as causes of maturation. 
Conditioned factors of the three time periods may function as 
comprehensive causes. Unconditioned factors, which act as 
comprehensive causes, are not connected to any time period. 

55c-d.(E428c) All conditioned factors are effects. The 
unconditioned factor, calculated cessation, is also an effect, that is, the 
effect of disconnection. Though this unconditioned factor is a cause 
and an effect, it does not have a cause nor an effect. 

Objection: If this unconditioned factor is an effect it must have a 
cause. 

Answer: The noble path is the cause of attaining this disconnection; 
therefore, disconnection is not an effect that is produced, but rather an 
effect that is attained. The path acts as the homogeneous or 
simultaneous cause for the production of the possession of this 
disconnection, but this possession produced by these three causes is 


NYAYANUSARA 709 


not the desired end of the noble path; the end is this disconnection, or 
the unconditioned factor itself, which is attained through this 
possession. 

Objection: If the unconditioned factors are comprehensive causes, 
why are they without an effect? 

Answer: Unconditioned factors act as comprehensive causes only in 
the sense of nonobstructing, and not in the sense of producing. Present 
and past conditioned factors have the twofold capability of taking and 
giving their effects; future and unconditioned factors lack this twofold 
capability; therefore they are said not to have an effect. The 
unconditioned may also serve as the supporting object of mental 
perceptual consciousness, but in that case, it is not a productive cause. 

Vasubandhu (adopting the Sautrantika position): Since, unlike 
material form, unconditioned factors are not distinct entities, they do 
not actually exist. These unconditioned factors are mere absences. For 
example, space is the mere absence of the tangible; the concept of 
space is produced with regard to the absence of material form. 

Answer: Space exists as a distinct actual entity that acts to support 
wind and is manifested by light. The existence of space can be inferred 
from these activities. Its characteristic is the nonobstruction of others, 
and nonobstruction by others. Further, precisely because space can 
serve as the supporting object in the production of the concept "space", 
it can be said to exist as an actual entity. Cognition is not produced 
without an existent supporting object. 

Vasubandhu (as a Sautrantika): The unconditioned factor, 
uncalculated cessation or nirvana, is merely the cessation of seeds of 
proclivities brought about through the power of realization such that 
they will never arise again. By cultivating the antidotes to these 
proclivities one develops a personal physical and psychic basis that is 
opposed to their arising. This cessation is then a mere absence of these 
proclivities and their seeds; it is not an existent entity in itself. 

Answer: Calculated cessation does exist as an actual entity 
constituting the abandonment of all defilements of a particular 
category in all three time periods. Through the practice of the noble 
path, one first severs one's possession of a particular category of 
defilements; then one acquires possession of the cessation, or 
disconnection from, this category of defilements. Therefore, one 
acquires possession of this cessation for each particular category of 
defilements that are to be abandoned. 


710 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Vasubandhu (as a Sautrantika): Uncalculated cessation is a mere 
deficiency or absence of conditions necessary for the arising of a 
particular factor. 

Answer: A mere absence is not capable of preventing the arising of 
a factor. Rather, uncalculated cessation must be a distinct factor 
attained due to a deficiency of conditions, which then itself prevents 
a factor from ever arising. 

56-58.(E435c) These six types of causes produce four types of 
effects as follows: effects of karmic maturation are produced by the 
cause of maturation. These effects of maturation are the products of 
previous action and are limited to those factors indicating sentient 
beings. The cause of maturation must be either virtuous or unvirtuous, 
and its effect is always morally neutral. 

Effects of outflow are always similar to their causes in moral quality 
and often in essential nature. They are produced by either the 
homogeneous cause or the pervasive cause. 

An effect of service is an effect produced through the power of 
another. In its specific sense, this effect is produced by simultaneous 
and associated causes. In its broader sense, this effect can be produced 
in the same moment as its cause, in the immediately succeeding 
moment, temporally separated from its cause, or may not be produced. 
This last category refers to the cessation through realization or nirvana 
which, though not produced, is attained through the power of the 
path. 

The dominant effect is produced by the comprehensive cause. Since 
all factors may act as comprehensive causes, as nonobstructing causes 
in the arising of any factor other than itself, any conditioned factor 
may be the dominant effect of all other conditioned factors. However, 
a given factor cannot be the sovereign effect of those factors that arose 
prior to it; an effect never precedes its cause. 

The effect of disconnection, which is identical to the cessation 
through realization, nirvana, is not attained through a cause of 
production. Therefore, it is not attained through the activity of any of 
the six causes. 

59.(E437c) These six causes function causally in two stages. The 
first is that of taking or projecting the effect, through which the cause 
draws out a future factor preparing it for its production. This "taking" 
occurs only when a cause is itself in the present time period; this 
present activity alone is referred to as that cause's function. The second 


NYAYANUSARA 711 


stage is that of giving cr producing the effect, through which the cause 
gives the effect power enabling it to arise. This "giving" may occur 
when the cause is in the present or past time period and is referred to 
as a cause's capability. This second stage of "giving" the effect cannot 
occur without the first stage of "taking" the effect. 

All six causes take or draw out their effects only when they 
themselves are in the present time period. The simultaneous and 
associated causes also give or produce their effect only when they are 
in the present time period. The homogeneous and pervasive causes 
give their effect when they are present or past. If the effect of the 
comprehensive cause is produced by it, this effect is given when the 
comprehensive cause is present or past. The cause of maturation gives 
its effect only when it is in the past time period. 

60-61c.(E438b.26) No factor is produced by one cause alone. The 
number of causes that produce any given factor is determined by that 
factor's essential nature as thought, material form, or dissociated from 
thought and material form, its moral quality, and so on. Further, 
though certain categories of factors may not function as certain types 
of causes, all classes of factors, with the exception of unconditioned 
factors, may function causally in more than one way. Unconditioned 
factors can only be comprehensive causes. 

61c-62d.(E440a) Causal relations can also be described in terms of 
four kinds of conditions. The first of these four, the causal condition, 
includes five of the previously listed six causes with the exception of 
the comprehensive cause. These conditions only include conditioned 
factors; since unconditioned factors can also serve as comprehensive 
causes, they are excluded from the four conditions. Even though 
conditioned factors exist in their essential nature in the three time 
periods, the arising of their activity is dependent upon the power of 
conditions, among which the causal condition, which is equivalent to 
the previously listed five causes, is predominant. 

Srilata: This causal condition should not be interpreted in terms of 
five distinct types of causation; rather, all causes are simply the 
subsidiary element, which acts as the cause in the reciprocal and 
successive conditioning process referred to as the life-stream of 
sentient beings. For example, even though evil qualities may be 
manifest in any given moment, there are latent roots of virtue which 
have not yet been severed from which other virtuous qualities may 
arise. These latent roots of virtue are the subsidiary element; it is an 


712 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


element permeated by factors of various types. 

Answer: This "subsidiary element" is simply another name for the 
seed, whose existence we have already refuted (see 2.36). Causal 
interaction can only be explained through the activity of these five 
causes, which are equivalent to the causal condition. Each of these five 
causes functions in different circumstances, which should be clearly 
distinguished; the differences among them should not be obliterated 
by equating them with a general "subsidiary element". 

The second of the four conditions, the directly antecedent 
condition, includes all present awarenesses and associated mental 
factors, with the exception of the last moment of awareness before a 
perfected being attains nirvana. These awarenesses and accompanying 
factors condition the arising of subsequent equivalent awarenesses or 
accompanying factors. "Equivalent" refer to factors of the same general 
category, such as feelings, ideas, and so on, and does not exclude a 
conditioning relationship between morally different accompanying 
factors of the same category. However, since the causal efficacy of the 
directly antecedent condition operates only successively, it does 
exclude the possibility of two equivalent accompanying factors arising 
in the same moment. "Contiguous" indicates that no factor of the same 
general category can arise between this condition and its effect. 
Therefore, the stream of awarenesses and accompanying factors may 
be interrupted by forces dissociated from awareness, as in the case of 
meditative states without awareness. Even in this case, awareness and 
accompanying factors immediately prior to the state without 
awareness can function as directly antecedent conditions in the arising 
of subsequent awarenesses and accompanying factors (see 2.42-43). 
Material form cannot act as a directly antecedent condition because 
more than one material factor of any given category arises in one 
moment in the life-stream of sentient beings. 

The third of the four conditions, the supporting object condition, 
provides support for the production of perceptual consciousness and 
accompanying factors. All factors may serve as a supporting condition 
since no factor exists other than those that support perceptual 
consciousnesses. The five externally directed types of perceptual 
consciousness are supported by five corresponding supporting objects 
that are present and simultaneous with perceptual consciousness; the 
sixth type of mental perceptual consciousness may be supported by 
any factor in any time period. 


= 


ate eas 


NYAYANUSARA 713 


Srilata: The external objects corresponding to the five externally 
directed types of perceptual consciousness cannot be their supporting 
object conditions, because this supporting object cannot be 
simultaneous with the perceptual consciousness that it produces. 
Mental perceptual consciousness would also be incapable of being 
supported by a present object. Instead, mental perceptual 
consciousness takes the previous objects of the five externally directed 
types of perceptual consciousness as its supporting object. Since this 
prior supporting object has already passed away, it no longer exists; 
nonetheless, it still may serve as a supporting object for perceptual 
consciousness. However, the cause for the arising of a present moment 
of perceptual consciousness is the prior moment of perceptual 
consciousness within the same stream; this causal relation between a 
prior and successive momentis one of reciprocal succession within the 
same stream. 

Answer: Since Srilata does not allow that the supporting objects of 
the five externally directed types of perceptual consciousness are 
simultaneous with their corresponding perceptual consciousness, 
mental perceptual consciousness cannot depend upon the supporting 
object of a prior moment of the five externally directed types of 
perceptual consciousness. Further, it is absurd to claim that even 
though this past object does not exist it can still serve as the supporting 
object for present mental perceptual consciousness; perceptual 
consciousness can only be supported by an existent object. Indeed, 
since the Darstantikas accept the existence only of present factors and 
reject those of the past and future, one cannot speak of reciprocal 
succession. How can there be a causal relation between a nonexistent 
past factor and an existent present one? Therefore, supporting objects 
of perceptual consciousness must exist, and those of the five externally 
directed types of perceptual consciousness are simultaneous with their 
corresponding perceptual consciousness. 

The last of the four conditions, the dominant condition, is identical 
to the nonobstructing variety of comprehensive cause. This condition 
is named "dominant" because it both includes and effects the greatest 
number of factors; all factors can act as the dominant condition in the 
production of all factors other than itself. 

Even though causes and conditions do not differ in their essential 
nature in general, they can be distinguished as follows: causes are only 
able to produce, that is, project or take their own effect, while 


714 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


conditions nourish, assist, or support the arising of the effect of 
another factor. Therefore, the arising of any factor will have at least 
one cause and many conditions. When the four conditions are 
compared to the five causes, the directly antecedent condition and the 
supporting object condition cannot be identified with any of the five 
causes. 

63.(E450a) Vasubandhu suggests that the simultaneous and 
associated causes and the supporting object condition perform their 
function with regard to present factors that are about to pass away. He 
also claims that homogeneous and pervasive causes, causes of 
maturation, and the equivalent contiguous condition function with 
regard to future factors that are about to be produced. Vasubandhu, 
however, has confused a factor's functioning, which only occurs in the 
present and only refers to that factor's projecting its own effect, with 
its capability, which occurs in all three time periods and may assist in 
the arising of the effect of another factor. This confusion of 
functioning and capability is particularly obvious in the case of causes 
of maturation. A cause of maturation acts to produce its effect, which 
is just about to be produced, when it is long past. This causal activity 
cannot, then, be its present functioning. Therefore, causal efficacy is 
not limited to present functioning, but also includes capability. 
Further, causal efficacy is not limited to production, but includes the 
activities of supporting and so on. 

64.(E457a) All conditioned factors are produced from a number of 
causes and conditions. For example, awareness and mental factors are 
produced from the four conditions; the two balanced states without 
awareness are produced from three conditions; and the other forces 
dissociated from awareness and material form are produced from two 
conditions. All conditioned factors are produced from such causes and 
conditions; there is none that arises from one cause, whether this 
single cause be a God, the self, or a primal source. If conditioned 
factors arose from a single cause, all factors would arise 
simultaneously and not in sequence because that single cause would 
always be present. What other factor would prevent this simultaneous 
arising of all conditioned factors? If you say that the sequential arising 
of factors results from the successive desires of this God, or single 
cause, then these factors arise from multiple desires and not from a 
single cause. In any case how would this singular God have multiple 
desires? If you say that God's desire produces the sequential arising of 


NYAYANUSARA 715 


conditioned factors through the activity of other causes, these other 
causes would in tum depend on others ad infinitum. If you accept this, 
responding that these other causes have no beginning, then you have 
accepted the Buddhist position. Further, there is no advantage for God 
to cause these conditioned factors. If you say that itis merely for God's 
own satisfaction, then God would not be God in the true sense of the 
term because his satisfaction depends upon this creation. Further, 
what kind of God would create frustration? If one accepts God as the 
unique cause, one denies causes that are apparent in ordinary 
experience. If one says that God works through these ordinary causes, 
we reply that the activity of God is not apparent and need not be 
inferred; therefore, it cannot be assumed to exist. All such theories of 
production from one cause are thereby rejected. 

65.(E452a) The four great elements act as homogeneous and 
simultaneous causes in the arising of other great elements. They act as 
causes of derived material form in five ways: production, dependence, 
support, maintenance, and growth.These are all forms of the 
comprehensive cause; the five other types of causal activities are 
absent in the causal relation between the fundamental elements and 
derived material form. Derived material form acts as the simultaneous 
and homogeneous causes, and as the cause of maturation of other 
derived material form. 

66-71b.(E453a-464) Causal relations among moments of awareness 
must be discussed in terms of the twelve types of awareness. In the 
material realm there are four types of awareness: good, bad, obscured 
neutral, and unobscured neutral. In both the material and immaterial 
realms there are three, excluding bad awarenesses. Therefore, there 
are ten varieties of contaminating awareness within these three 
realms. There are only two types of uncontaminating awareness: those 
of disciples and adepts. Causal relations among these twelve types of 
awareness are determined by those types of awareness that may follow 
others. 

These twelve categories of awareness may be expanded to twenty 
as follows: (1) by dividing good awareness in each realm into two 
types--acquired at birth, and acquired through effort; (2) by dividing 
unobstructed neutral awareness of the realm of desire into four types-- 
those that are the matured effects, those associated with the modes of 
proper deportment, those associated with skill in the arts, and those 
associated with magical creations; (3) by dividing those of the material 


716 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


realm into three types, including the four previous types with the 
exception of those associated with skill in the arts. Again, causal 
relations among these twelve types of awareness are determined by 
those types that may follow others. 

73.(E465b) The arising of each of these twelve or twenty types of 
thought entails also the possession of certain other categories of 
thought that may be produced if certain other requisite conditions are 
present. 


207. SANGHABHADRA, Abhidharmasamayapradipika 


This work is about one-third the size of 206.Nyayanusara, and also 
follows Vasubandhu's 173.AbhidharmakoSa's verses, but lacks the 
extended critique of the views of Vasubandhu and Srilata, etc. Collett 
Cox suggests that it "can be understood as Saighabhadra's own 
exposition of what he considers to be orthodox Kasmira Sarvastivada- 
Vaibhasika doctrine."5% 

The title is a reconstruction suggested by Unrai Wogihara. It is 
available in a Chinese translation by Hsiian-tsang (T.1563), made in 
651-652. No translation into Western languages is available. There is 
a Japanese translation by Hayashi Goho in KIK.Bidambara, vols. 23-24. 

Collet Cox comments: "(T)he *Nydydnusara and the 
*Abhidharmasamayapradipika differ in their approach. In both texts, 
Sanghabhadra follows Vasubandhu's AbhidharmakoSsakarika, adopting 
its verses with minimal emendations. However, the *Nyayanusara is 
almost three times longer than the Abhidharmakosabhasya and 
contains lengthy refutations of doctrinal interpretations offered by 
Vasubandhu and others whether or not they are cited in Vasubandhu's 
text. By contrast, the *Abhidharmasamayapradipikd omits these 
explicit refutations and, thus, can be understood as Sanghabhadra's 
own exposition of what he considers to be orthodox Kasmira 
Sarvastivada-Vaibhasika doctrine." 


ENDNOTES 


1. Alex Wayman studies a few passages where lists of views are found. Cf. 
Wayman, "The twenty reifying views", in Studies in Pali and Buddhism. J. 
Kashyap Memorial Volume (1979), pp. 375-380. 

2. For a review and critique of those who take some of these views see 
J.W.de Jong, "The problem of the Absolute in the Madhyamika", Journal 
of Indian Philosophy 2.1, 1972, 1-6, and "Emptiness", Journal of Indian 
Philosophy 2.1, 1972, 7-15. 

3. Cf. 34.Vigrahavyavarttani. 

4. Cf. A.K.Warder, "Is Nagarjuna a Mahayanist?", in Mervyn Sprung (ed.), 
The Problem of Two Truths in Buddhism and Vedanta (D. Reidel: 
Dordrecht 1973), 78-88. 

5. There have been a few attempts to show Nagarjuna dealing with non- 
Buddhist views. 

6. Gregory Schopen, "The inscription on the Kusan image of Amitabha and 
the character of the early Mahayana in India", Journal of the International 
Association of Buddhist Studies 10.2, 1987, p. 117. 

7. Ibid., p. 118. 

8. Gregory Schopen, "The generalization of an old yogic attainment in 
medieval Mahaydna Sittra literature: some notes on jatismara", Journal of 
the International Association of Buddhist Studies p. 132. 

9. Schopen, ibid., 132-133. 

10. Schopen, "The inscription on the Kusan image" (see note 6), p. 109. 
11. Ibid., p. 125. 

12. Ibid., p. 125. 

13. E. Ziircher, "A new look at the earliest Chinese Buddhist texts", in From 
Benares to Beijing: Essays on Buddhism and Chinese Religion (ed. Koichi 
Shinohara and Gregory Schopen) (Oakville, Ontario 1991), 277-304. 

14. Nancy Schuster in her unpublished dissertation (University of Toronto 
1976) assigns the authorship of a Maitreyapariprechd (T. 348) to An Shih- 
kao; the work constitutes #41 of the Ratnakiita collecton. This work does 
not appear in Ziircher's list. 

15. Ziircher, op. cit., pp. 282-283. 

16. Pp. 93-95. 

17. E.g., T.W.Rhys Davids, "Schools of Buddhist belief’, Journal of the 
Royal Asiatic Society 1892, 1-38; Nalinaksha Dutt, "Introduction to the 
evolution of the schools of Buddhism", Journal of the Department of 
Letters, University of Calcutta 3, 1920, 247-266 and "The Buddhist sects: 
a survey", in D.R.Bhandarkar et al., eds., B.C.Law Volume One, Calcutta 
1945, 282-292; Etienne Lamotte, Histoire du Bouddhisme Indien (Louvain 


718 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


1958), translated into English by Sarah Boin, Louvain 1988, p. 518; 
Edward Conze, Buddhist Thought in India (London 1962). 

18. Etienne Lamotte, Histoire du Bouddhisme Indien, ibid., English 
translation, p. 518. 

19. Ibid., p. 519. 

20. Ibid., p. 521. 

21. Bareau, Les Sectes Bouddhiques...pp. 36-37. 

22. Drawn from Bareau, ibid., pp. 36-38, Added information along these 
lines is available there. 

23, These seventy-two views are set forth in Bareau, ibid., pp. 89-98. 

24. Bareau, ibid., p. 112. 

25. K.R.Norman, Pali Literature (Wiesbaden 1983), pp. 1-7. 

26. For an account of what is known of these Atthakathds' history cf. 
K.R.Norman, ibid., pp. 118-120. For an extended attempt to organize the 
quotations and references in Buddhaghosa's writing to these Atthakathds 
consult Friedgard Lottermoser's published dissertation Quoted Verse 
Passages in the Works of Buddhaghosa: Contributions Towards the Study 
of the Lost Sihalatthakathd Literature (Gottingen 1982). 

27. Ho-Li-Pa-Mo Ch'uan, quoted in the Ch'u-San-Ts'ang-Chi-Chi, 11, Taisho 
vol. LV, pp. 78b-79b. 

28. For a summary of some of these cf. James P. McDermott, "Karma and 
rebirth in early Buddhism", in Wendy Doniger O'Flaherty (ed.), Karma and 
Rebirth in Classical Indian Traditions (Berkeley, California: University of 
California Press), pp. 165-192, on which the account given here is largely 
based. 

29. On the intermediate state see Alex Wayman, "The intermediate-state 
dispute in Buddhism" in Buddhist Studies in Honor of I.B.Horner (ed. L. 
Cousins, A.Kunst and K.R.Normaa) (Riedel: Dordrecht 1974); Y. Krishan, 
“Buddhism and belief in atma", Journal of the International Academy of 
Buddhist Studies 7.2, 1984, 117-132; Donald w. Mitchell, "Karma in 
Buddhist thought" in $.$.Rama Rao Pappu (ed.), The Dimensions of 
Karma (Delhi 1987), 66-93, 

30. Cf. Kyodo Yamada, "On the idea of ‘avijfiapti-karma' in Abhidharma 
Buddhism", Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 10.1, 1962, 51-55. 
31. Shanta Ratnayaka, "Metapsychology of the Abhidharma", Journal of the 
Indian Academy of Buddhist Studies 4.2, 1981, 76-90.. 

32. Collett Cox, Disputed Dharmas. Early Buddhist Theories on Existence 
(Tokyo 1995)., pp. 69-70. I have replaced Cox's term "defilement", by 
which she translates anuSaya, by the translation of that word used in our 
present volume, "proclivity", in order to avoid confusion. 

33. For further discussion of these matters cf. Cox, ibid., pp. 70-74. 

34. For an extensive discussion of this section cf. Cox, ibid., pp. 82-90. 
35. Cox, ibid., p. 83. 


ENDNOTES 719 


36. Akira Hirakawa, A History of Indian Buddhism From Sakyamuni to 
Early Mahayéna (tr. Paul Groner), Asian Studies at Hawaii No. 36 
(Honolulu, Hawaii: University of Hawaii Press, 1990), pp. 306-309. 

37. Cf. Ria Kloppenborg, The Paccekabuddha. A Buddhist Ascetic (Leiden 
1974) for the basis for these remarks and a survey of the literature 
televant to the self-enlightened. 

38. Majjhima Nikdya 112. 

39. E.J.Thomas, "Nirvana and parinirvana", in India Antiqua (Leiden 1947), 
Pp. 294 ff. 

40. Peter Masefield, "The Nibbana-parinibbana controversy", Religion 9, 
1979, 215-230. 

41. Kenneth R. Norman, "Mistaken ideas about nibbana" in Tadeusz 
Skorupski and Ulrich Pagel, eds., The Buddhist Forum, Volume III (School 
of Oriental and African Studies, University of London: London 1994), pp. 
216-217. 

42. Paul Harrison, "Who gets to ride in the great vehicle? Self-image and 
identity among the followers of the early Mahayana", Journal of the 
International Association of Buddhist Studies 10.1, 1987, 67-90. 

43. Or dsraya-parivrtti; both forms are found. Cf. Ronald Mark Davidson's 
1985 doctoral dissertation at the University of California at Berkeley, 
unpublished, on Buddhist Systems of Transformation: Asraya-parivrtti/- 
Pardvrtti Among the Yogiacara, pp. 151-155, for a discussion of the 
terminology. 

44. Davidson, ibid., pp. 160 ff. 

45. Cf. Davidson, ibid., pp. 150-151. 

46. This paragraph is based on Davidson, ibid., pp. 183-184, for which see 
appropriate references. 

47. Paul J. Griffiths, On Being Mindless: Buddhist Meditation and the 
Mind-Body Problem (LaSalle, Ill., 1986), pp. 49-50. 

48. A. Charlene McDermott, "Asaniga's defense of Glayavijridna. Of catless 
grins and sundry related matters", Journal of Indian Philosophy 2, 1973, 
167-174. 

49. Hugh B. Urban and Paul J. Griffiths, "What else remains in Siinyata? 
An investigation of terms for mental imagery in the Madhyantavibhaga- 
corpus", Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 17.1, 
1994, 1-25. 

50. Gadjin M. Nagao, "What remains in Stinyatd: a Yogacara interpretation 
of emptiness" in Minoru Kiyota (ed.), Mahayana Buddhist Meditation: 
Theory and Practice (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1978). 

51. Urban and Griffiths, op. cit., p. 1. 

52. Ibid., p. 19. 

53. Ibid., p. 20. 

54. This paragraph is based on Noriaki Hakamaya, "The realm of 


720 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


enlightenment in Vijfiaptimatrata: the formulation of the four kinds of pure 
dharmas", translated by John Keenan, Journal of the International 
Association of Buddhist Studies 3.2, 1980, 22-26 

55. Cf. Griffiths, On Being Mindless, op. cit., pp. 86-91 for an excellent 
discussion of this point. 

56. Griffiths, ibid., p. 18. 

57. Ibid., pp. 18-29., 

58. Griffiths, ibid., pp. 64-65. 

59. Griffiths, ibid., pp. 71-72. 

60. Griffiths, ibid., p. 73. 

61. Paul Griffiths analyzes eight such arguments, found for example in 
Asanga's Yogacadrabhiimi. Cf. Griffiths, ibid., pp. 96-104. 

62. Cf. Brian Galloway, "A Yogacara analysis of the mind, based on the 
Vijfiana section of Vasubandhu's Pajicaskandhaprakarana with 
Gunaprabha's commentary", Journal of the International Association of 
Buddhist Studies 3.2, 1980, 7-20. Cf. as well Paul Williams, "Some aspects 
of language and construction in the Madhyamaka", Journal of Indian 
Philosophy 8, 1980, 1-45 

63. Cf. Aruna Haldar, "Samjfia@ skandha or _ perception 
formation/composition", Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society 
44, 1958, 37-42, 

64. Memory in Buddhism has received extended attention in the book In 
the Mirror of Memory edited by Janet Gyatso (State University of New 
York Press: Albany, N.Y. 1992). See especially Collett Cox's article dealing 
with the treatment of this concept in Sarvastivada, the Mahdvibhasd, 
Vasubandhu and Sanghabhadra, and Paul Griffiths' article concerning its 
treatment in Yogacara. 

65. We adopt the standard translation of klesa, but with misgivings. Stefan 
Anacker remarks, "...'klesa' has never meant, either in Sanskrit or for any 
people in direct contact with Indian masters, "defilement’, as it is usually 
translated. The Sanskrit root ‘klis' means 'to be afflicted, to be tormented, 
to suffer’, and a klesa is accordingly ‘an affliction, pain, anguish, suffering" 
(Anacker, Seven Works of Vasubandhu (Motilal Banarsidass: Delhi 1984), 
146-147). Since the translation is "standard", we have stuck with it despite 
Anacker; the term "affliction" is standardly used (and we follow this usage) 
to translate a different Sanskrit term in Buddhist studies, viz., "upaklesa". 
66. See the discussion in Anacker, ibid., pp. 147-148. 

67. Cf. Nathan Katz, "Does the ‘cessation of the world’ entail the cessation 
of emotions? The psychology of the arahant", Pali Buddhist Review 4, 
1979, 53-65. 

68. Collett Cox, Disputed Dharmas..., op. cit., p. 10. The remainder of the 
present section is based on Cox's book. 

69. This section is based on Cox, ibid., 53-58. 


ENDNOTES 721 


70-. For the various solutions to this problem that were proposed in 
Abhidharma literature see Cox, ibid., 53-68. 

71. Cox, ibid., pp. 65-66. 

72. Hirakawa, op. cit., p. 276. 

73. Hirakawa, op. cit. For example, a Bodhisattvapitaka appears as a 
portion of the Ratnakita collection (T.310 (12) and T. 316, as well as Toh. 
56). 

74. Hirakawa, op. cit., p. 276 

75. As indicated in Hirakawa, ibid., p. 276. 

76. Jacques May, "On Madhyamika philosophy", Journal of Indian 
Philosophy 6, 1978, 233-234. 

77. Chinese Tao-hsing pan-jo ching is T. (=Taisho) 224, the earliest 
translation is by Lokaksema, who translated over twenty Mahayana works 
between 147 and 186 A.D. This is the earliest of some seven Chinese 
renditions (T. 225-228 and 220.4-5) stemming from different periods. 
These seven translations are discussed extensively in Lewis R. Lancaster, 
"The oldest Mahayana Siitra: its significance for the study of Buddhist 
development", The Eastern Buddhist n.s. 8.1, 1975, 30-41. It is also extant 
in Sanskrit manuscripts found in Nepal. This Sanskrit text is edited by 
Rajendralal Mitra in Bibliotheca Indica 110, 1888, reprinted in the edition 
by Unrai Wogihara published from Tokyo in 1932-35, and (with revisions) 
in P.L.Vaidya's revised edition from Darbhanga 1960. A complete English 
translation of this text by Edward Conze can be found in Bibliotheca Indica 
284, Calcutta 1958, reprinted in Bolinas, California 1973, 1975. For details 
on these and other materials consult Conze, The Prajfiaparamitd Literature 
(Mouton: The Hague, 1960; Second Edition revised and enlarged, The 
Reiyukai: Tokyo, 1978.) 

Some chapters of the work have been translated into Western 
languages in various places. See K.H.Potter (ed.), Bibliography of Indian 
Philosophies, Third Revised Edition (Motilal Banarsidass: Delhi 1995, pp. 
72-73. 

78. Hirakawa, op. cit., 248-249. 

79. A. K. Warder, Indian Buddhism (Motilal Banarsidass: Delhi 1970), p. 
367. 

80. Robert F. Olson, "Whitehead, Madhyamika, and the Prajiiaparamita", 
Philosophy East and West 25, 1975, pp. 453-457. 

81. Ziircher, op. cit., pp. 397-298, provides a list of sixteen titles in Chinese 
that correspond to sixteen different Taisho translations made by An Shikao 
(active ca. 150-170 A.D.), and also gives a brief description of the contents 
of each. Our numbers 5-14 are taken from this list, choosing the ten texts 
which, given Ziircher's description, seem to contain philosophical content. 
82. Emile Ziircher, The Buddhist Conquest of China (Second edition, 
Leiden 1972), p. 34. 


722 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


83. Ziircher, ibid., p. 33. 
84. T.31, 1 chuan. 
85. T.32, 1 chuan. 
86. T.36, 1 chuan. 
87. T.57, 1 chuan. 
88. T.98, 1 chuan. 
89. T.112, 1 chuan. 
90. T.602, 2 chuan. 
91. T.603, 1 chuan. 
92. T605, 1 chuan. 
93. Chinese A-she-shih-wang cing (T.626). There are four Chinese (T.626- 
629) and one Tibetan version, ranging in date from Lokaksema's Chinese 
translation in 196 A.D. to as late as 1000. The Sanskrit text is lost. Cf. 
Paul Harrison, "Who gets to ride...", op. cit., pp. 67-90. In another place 
Harrison discusses some passages from the Tibetan translations, and 
remarks on "the doctrinal richness of (it)...as well as the presence in it of 
apparent Yogacara tendencies" (Paul Harrison, "Is the dharma-kaya the real 
‘phantom body’ of the Buddha?", Journal of the International Association 
of Buddhist Studies 15, 1992, 44-93). 
94. This work is extant in five Chinese (including T.310 (43), 350-352) 
and one Tibetan (Toh. 87) version. Fragments of the Sanskrit are known. 
The oldest Chinese translation (T.350) is attributed to Lokaksema. Most of 
the versions have been translated into German and/or English. Cf. 
Harrison, "Who gets to ride...", ibid., p. 70; Bhikkhu Pasadika, "Biographical 
remarks bearing on the Kasyapaparivarta", Buddhist Studies Review 8, 
1991, 59-70. Hirakawa feels that "early versions of the Ratnakita" (of 
which this work is one of the oldest sections) "must have existed by the 
first century C.E." (Hirakawa, op. cit., p. 251). 

The 45th section of this work constitutes T.310 (45) and Toh. 89, 
titled Aksayamatipariprecha. It is translated in Garma C. C. Chang, A 
Treasury of Mahayana Siitras. Selections from the Mahdratnakiita Siitra 
(Pennsylvania State Press: University Park, Penna., 1983), pp. 415-424. 
95. Chinese A-ch'u-fo-kuo ching (T.310 (6)), translated into Chinese by 
Lokaksema, as well as a Tibetan version from the ninth century; cf. 
Harrison, "Who gets to ride...", op. cit., p. 71. Another Chinese translation 
dates from 335 or so, and a third from the eighth century. For full 
teferences cf. Buddhist Text Information 40, 1984, 3-5. A French 
translation of Book I, Chapters 1-3 is available in Jean Dantinne, La 
Splendeur de I'Inébranlable (Aksobhavyiiha)(Louvain-la-Neuve 1983). 
There is an English translation of most of this work in Chang, Treasury..., 
op. cit. pp. 315-338. 
96. Chinese Tun-chen-t'o-lo-ching. There are two Chinese translations 
(T.624 and 625) and one Tibetan version. The oldest is by Lokaksema. 


ENDNOTES 723 


The Sanskrit is lost. The Tibetan text has been edited by Paul Harrison in 
Druma-kinnara-raja-pariprecha-siitra. A Critical Edition of the Tibetan Text 
(Recension A) Based on Eight Editions of the Kanjur and the Dunhuang 
Manuscript Fragment (Tokyo 1992). 

97. Harrison, ibid., pp. xv-xvi. 

98. This work is T.807. There is one Tibetan translation by Jinamitra, 
Danasila and Ye ses sde from the beginning of the ninth century. Paul 
Harrison (in "Sanskrit fragments of a Lokottaravadin tradition", Indological 
and Buddhist Studies. Volume in Honour of Professor J.W.de Jong on his 
Sixtieth Birthday (Canberra 1982), pp. 211-234) reports the Chinese title 
as Fo shuo nei zang bai bao jing, which he renders as Sitra of the 
Hundred Gems of the Inner Treasury as Expounded by the Buddha. Our 
summary is taken from p. 212 of Harrison's article. 

99. In Chinese Pan-chou san-mei ching (T.416-419) and in Tibetan. The 
oldest Chinese translation is Lokaksema's. The Sanskrit text is lost, except 
for the portion (T.418) published as Bhadrapdlasiitra by A.F.R.Hoernlé in 
Manuscript Remains of Buddhist Literature found in East Turkestan 
(Oxford 1916; Amst =rdam 1970), pp. 88-93, 410-411. The Tibetan version 
is edited in Paul Harrison, The Tibetan Text of the Pratyutpanna-Buddha 
Sanmukhavasthita-Samadhi-Siitra (Studia Philologica Buddhica 
Monograph Series 1) (Tokyo 1978) and translated in Paul Harrison, The 
Samadhi of Direct Encounter with the Buddhas of the Present (Studia 
Philologica Buddhica 5) (Tokyo 1990). There is also a Mongolian version 
and Japanese translations of T. 417 and T. 418. Harrison is publishing an 
English translation of T. 418 in the forthcoming English translation of the 
Chinese Tripitaka, Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai, Tokyo. 

100. T. 280. "There are two other Chinese versions (T.278, T.279), and 
one Tibetan version, the Sangs-rgyas phal-po-che zhes-bya-ba shin-tu rgyas- 
pa chen-po'i mdo. The material corresponding to (this text) occurs in 
Chap. XII...and Chap. XIV...(of the Avatamsaka Sitra). For an English 
translation of the entire AvatamSakasiitra see Thomas Cleary, tr., The 
Flower Ornament Scripture: A Translation of the Avatamsaka Sitra, Vol. 
I (Shambala, Boulder 1984)." (Quoted from Harrison, "Who gets to ride...", 
pp. 69-70. 

101. T. 458. The Sanskrit title is unknown. This is the only version. 

102. The Sanskrit text is lost. Lokaksema is credited with having translated 
this siitra into Chinese in 186 A.D., followed by other such translations 
during the third century (cf. Etienne Lamotte, tr., La Concentration de la 
Marche Héroique, Melanges Chinois et Bouddhique 13, 1965, pp. 66-97). 
The earliest version available to us.is the Chinese translation by 
Kumarajiva (T. 642) at the beginning of the fifth century. This is translated 
into French by Lamotte, ibid., pp. 117-275. Portions of a Tibetan edition 
are translated into English in Thubten Kalsang Rinpoche and Bhikkhu 


724 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Pasadika, Excerpts from the Siirangama Samadhi Sitra (Dharamsala 
1970). 

Various later versions are the bases of translations by Ernst 
Leumann, Zur nordarischen-sprache und Literatur (Strassburt 1912); 
Dwight Goddard (ed.), A Buddhist Bible (Thetford, Vt. 1932; New York 
1935-37, 1952; Boston 1990), and R.E.Emmerick, The Khotanese 
Surangamasamadhisiitra (London 1970). The last renders a Khotanese 
fragment which may predate Kumarajiva. There is also an English 
translation by Charles Luk (London 19660. 

103. George Teschner, "Mind and body in the Sirangama Sitra", Journal 
of Indian Philosophy 9, 1981, 77-83. The selections are from pp. 78-81. 
104. T. 109, it was translated by An Shih-kao between 125-220 according 
to Stanislaw Schayer, "Notes and queries on Buddhism", Rocznik 
Orientalisticzny 11, 1935, 206-213. 

105. According to Nancy Schuster (op. cit.) this is T. 348, translated by An 
Shih-kao in 150-180 A.D. It constitutes #41 of the Ratnakiita collection, 
translated by Bodhiruci. There is also a Tibetan translation, P780.42. The 
work does not appear, at least under this title, in Ziircher's list of An Shih- 
kao's works. 

106. Chinese Fa-ching ching. There are four Chinese translations: T. 310 
(19), T. 322-323 and T.1521 (three more are said to have been lost). T322 
was translated by An Gen (or, according to Hirakawa, op. cit., pp. 251, 
275, by An Hsuan and Yen Fo-t'iao) around 180 A.D. Three Chinese 
translations are translated into English by Nancy Schuster in her doctoral 
dissertation from the University of Toronto 1976. 

Paul Harrison attributes the translation T.322 to An Xuan and Yan 
Fpts around 180 A.D. He also cites a Tibetan version that has been 
translated into Japanese by Hajime Sakurabe in Daijo button 9 (Tokyo 
1974), pp. 231-335 (Harrison, "Who gets to ride...", op. cit., p. 72). 

107. Schuster, ibid., p. 27. 

108. Schuster, ibid., pp. 37-38. 

109. T. 630. The translation is attributed to Zhi Yao of the late second 
century. 

110. Ziircher, op. cit., p. 299. 

111. There are two Sukhavativyiihas. Though they appear not to have been 
translated into Chinese until the middle of the third century A.D., Gregory 
Schopen dates the larger (Chinese Wu-liang-shou ching, T. 360) to the 
same period as the 45, Samadhirdjasiitra, viz., the second century A.D. The 
larger (Chinese T.310 (5), T360-364; Tibetan P760.5; and several more 
translations, now apparently lost) has been translated into English several 
times; cf. Hajime Nakamura, Indian Buddhism Gapan 1980; Motilal 
Banarsidass: Delhi, 1987), pp. 203-206 for bibliography. One of the lost 
commentaries is said to have been by Lokaksema. 


ENDNOTES 725 


Perhaps the most available of the many translations is by 
E.B.Cowell in Buddhist Mahayana Texts, Volume Two (Sacred Books of the 
East 49, 1894; Delhi 1965, 1968, 1972, 1975; New York 1969, etc.), p. 1- 
85. A somewhat more truncated rendition can be found in Chang, 
Treasury, op. cit., 339-360. Numbered sections in our summary correspond 
to those in Cowell's translation. 

112. Chinese A-mi-t'o ching, this is T. 366-367 and Toh. 115. Hirakawa, 
op.cit., pp. 286-287 thinks this, the smaller, may have been earlier than 
our 29. Both works have been available for many years in Max Miiller's 
translation (Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society n.s. 12, 1880, 168-186). 
There are many other translations; cf. Bibliography of Indian Philosophies, 
Volume Three Revised, op. cit., #45 for references. 

113. Sanskrit Recension A (the manuscript in the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 
Calcutta) is edited in A. Yuyama, Rgs (Sanskrit Recension A)(Cambridge 
1976). The date of this manuscript is 1174 A.D. The Sanskrit and Tibetan 
Recensions B are edited by Obermiller (Bibliotheca Buddhica 29, 1937) 
from a Chinese blockprint. For complete information about these sources 
see Yuyama, ibid., pp. xxiii-liii. 

114. Edward Conze (tr.), The Perfection of Wisdom in 8,000 Lines and Its 
Verse Summary (Bolinas 1973), 1-73. 

115. Cf. p. x of Conze, ibid. 

116. Edward Conze, "The Calcutta manuscript of the 
Ratnagunasamcayagatha", Indo-Iranian Journal 4, 1960, 37-58; 5, 1961, 
1-18. 

117. A portion of the (Buddha)AvatamSakasiitra. The Sanskrit text is edited 
by D.T. Suzuki and Hokei Idzumi in four volumes, Kyoto 1934-36, and 
reprinted Tokyo 1949. The entire AvatamSakasittra is translated by Thomas 
Cleary as The Flower Ornament Scripture (Boulder, Colo. 1984 et passim.). 

The Bhadracaryapranidhana (T.278 (31), T279, T.293.40, T.296; 
Toh. 1095; Toh. 4377, a chapter of the Gandavyitha, has been translated 
into English a good many times. See Bibliography of Indian Philosophies, 
Third Edition, Volume I, pp. 84-85, for detailed information on texts, 
translations and analyses. The summary provided here draws from Warder, 
op. cit., pp. 423-430. 

118. For a development of some of the themes so briefly indicated in this 
quote from Warder see Luis O. Gomez, "The Bodhisattva as wonder- 
worker", in Lewis Lancaster (ed.), Prajfiapadramita and Related Systems. 
Studies in Honor of Edward Conze (Berkeley Buddhist Series 1. 1977, pp. 
221-261, which contains a translation of a section of the text. 

119. Chr. Lindtner, Nagarjuniana. Studies in the Writings and Philosophy 
of Nagarjuna. Indiske Studier 4. (Akademisk Forlag: Copenhagen, 1982), 
referred to hereafter as Nagarjuniana. 

120. Nalinaksha Dutt, Buddhist Sects in India (Calcutta 1970), p. 277. 


726 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Consult P.S.Sastri, "Nagarjuna and Aryadeva", Indian Historical Quarterly 
31, 1955, 193-202 for an extensive review of the evidence regarding 
Nagarjuna's domicile. 

121. On the relations between the argumenis of Gautama and Nagarjuna 
see Johannes Bronkhorst, "Nagarjuna and the Naiyayikas", Journal of 
Indian Philosophy 13, 1985, 107-132. 

122. The time and location of scholarship concerning this work has been 
unusually piecemeal, growing largely by editions and translations of 
selected chapters with commentarial assistance, an appropriate procedure 
given the difficulty of understanding the text without commentarial help. 
There are numerous complete editions of verses, and English translations 
of the entire work by Frederick Streng, Emptiness: A Study in Religious 
Meaning (Nashville, Tenn. 1967); Kenneth K. Inada, Nagarjuna: A 
Translation of his Miilamadhyamakakarika (Tokyo 1970); David J. 
Kalupahana, Nagarjuna. The Philosophy of the Middle Way (Albany, N.Y., 
1986); by Ram Chandra Pandeya in Nagarjuna's Philosophy of No-Identity 
(Delhi 1991); by Jay L. Garfield, The Fundamental Wisdom of the Middle 
Way: Ndgarjuna's Milamadhyamaka-karika (Oxford University Press: 
Oxford, New York 1995). Summaries of the complete work exist in 
Satischandra Vidyabhusana, History of Indian Logic (Calcutta 1921; Delhi 
1971); David Seyfort Ruegg, The Literature of the Madhyamaka School of 
Philosophy in India (Wiesbaden 1981); and S.M. Shah, The Dialectic of 
Knowledge and Reality in Indian Philosophy: Kundakunda, Nagarjuna, 
Samkara (Delhi 1986), pp. 73-83. A guide to selected English translations 
of specific passages in specific chapters, frequently with explanatory 
discussion, is provided in the following footnotes for each Chapter of the 
work. 

123. See I 1; II 1, 21; IV 6, 8, 9; V 8; VI 4; VII 34; IX 5; X 10, 11, 16; XI 
1; XIII 1, 8; XIV 5-7; XV 1, 2, 10; XXI 6, 12; XXII 12, 15, 16; XXIII 1; XXIV 
8-10. 

124. Complete translations of this Chapter in English in Th. Stcherbatsky, 
Conception of Buddhist Nirvana (Leningrad 1927; The Hague 1965; 
Varanasi 1968; Delhi 1972, etc.); Swami Vimuktananda in Prabuddha 
Bharata 44, 1939; Heramba N. Chatterjee, Miila-Madhyamaka-Karika of 
Nagarjuna. Chapters I-V. Part I (Firma K.L. Mukhopadhyay: Calcutta 1957; 
Paul M. Williams in The Middle Way 52, 1977, 72ff. Studies of verses 1-2 
in Gadjin M. Nagao, "From Madhyamika to Yogacara, an analysis of MMK 
24.18 and MV 1.1-2", Journal of the International Association of Buddhist 
Studies 2.1, 1979, 29-43; of verse 1 in Yamakami Sogen, Systems of 
Buddhist Thought (Calcutta 1912; Varanasi 1970); of verses 1-3 and 12 in 
Richard Robinson, Early Madhyamika in India and China (U. of Wisconsin 
Press: Madison 1967); Lucid Exposition of the Middle Way (tr. Mervyn 
Sprung et al.)(Routledge and Kegan Paul: London 1979); verse 6 in Claus 


ENDNOTES 727 


Oetke, "On the non-formal aspects of the proofs of the 
Madhyamakakarikas", Panels of the 7th World Sanskrit Conference, Leiden, 
Aug. 23-29, 1987. Volume 2: Earliest Buddhism and Madhyamaka (ed. D.S. 
Ruegg and L. Schmithausen)(Leiden 1990); verses 24-40 in Alex Wayman, 
"Contributions to the Madhyamika school of Buddhism", Journal of the 
American Oriental Society 89, 1969, 141-152. 

125. Complete translations of this Chapter in Vidyabhusana, op. cit., 
Vimuktananda, op. cit.; H.N. Chatterjee, op. cit.; Kamaleswar Bhattacharya, 
"Nagarjuna's arguments against motion", Journal of the International 
Association of Buddhist Studies 8.1, 1985, 7-16; Brian Galloway, "Notes on 
Nagarjuna and Zeno on motion", Journal of the International Association 
of Buddhist Studies 10.2, 1987, 80-87; K.V. Apte, "Going? You cannot go! 
An exposition of Nagarjuna's Madhyamakakarika, Chapter II", Journal of 
Shivaji University 4, 1971, 43-60; Alex Wayman, "The gait (gati) and the 
path (marga)--reflections on the horizontal", Journal of the American 
Oriental Society 105, 1985, 579-588; Sprung et al., op. cit. Translations 
of 1, 8, 15, 24 and 25 in Robinson, op. cit.; of 1-6 in Kamaleshwar 
Bhattacharya, "The grammatical basis of Nagarjuna's arguments: some 
further considerations", Indologica Taurinensia 8-9, 1980-81, 35-44; of 22 
and 23 in Oetke, op. cit. Studies in T.R.V.Murti, "Nagarjuna's refutation 
of motion and rest", Philosophical Quarterly 9, 1933-34, 191-200; 
Kamaleswar Bhattacharya, "A reconsideration of Nagarjuna's arguments 
against motion", Visva-Bharati Annals n.s. 2-3, 1990, 1-13. 

126. Complete translation of this Chapter in Sprung et al., op. cit.; 
Vidyabhusana, op. cit.; H.N. Chatterjee, op. cit.; William Longstreet Ames, 
Bhavaviveka's Prajiiapradipa: Six Chapters. Ph.D.Thesis, University of 
Washington 1986. Translations of specific verses: 6-8 in Robinson, op. cit.; 
2 in David J. Kalupahana, The Principles of Buddhist Psychology (SUNY 
Press: Albany, N.Y. 1987). Summarized in Apte, "Perception is impossible: 
an exposition of Nagarjuna's Madhyamakakarika Ch. III", Journal of the 
Asiatic Society of Bombay 49-50, 1974-76, 1-14. 

127. Entire Chapter summarized in Sprung et al., op. cit.; H.N. Chatterjee, 
op. cit.; Ames, op. cit. Specific verses: 3 in Robinson, op.cit., 7-9 in K. 
Bhattacharya, "A note on the interpretation of the term s@dhyasama in 
Madhyamika texts", Journal of Indian Philosophy 2, 1974, 225-230. ; 
128. Complete translations in Nathan Katz, “Nagarjuna and Wittgenstein 
on error", in A.K. Narain (ed.), Studies in History of Buddhism (Delhi 
1980); Sprung et al., op. cit.; Vidyabhusana, op. cit.; H.N. Chatterjee, op- 
cit. Translation of verses 1-7 in Robinson, op. cit. 

129. Complete translations in Sprung et al., op. cit.; H.N. Chatterjee, op. 
cit. Verse 5 translated in Robinson, op. cit. 

130. Chapter summarized in H.N. Chatterjee, op. cit., part 2 (Calcutta 
1962); Vidyabhusana, op. cit.; Verses 1, 3, 20, 23, 29, 30, 33, 34 translated 


728 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


in Robinson, op. cit.; verses 2 and 17 in Oetke, op. cit.; 4 in Eli Franco, 
"Mahayana Buddhism--an unfortunate misunderstanding? Review of David 
J. Kalupahana's Nagarjuna: The Philosophy of the Middle Way", Berliner 
Indologische, Studien 4-5, 1989, 39-48; verses 33 and 34 in Richard King, 
"Sinyata and ajati: absolutism and the philosophies of Nagarjuna and 
Gaudapada", Journal of Indian Philosophy 18, 1989, 385-406. 

131. Complete translation in Sprung et al., op. cit.; Vidyabhusana, op. cit.; 
H.N. Chatterjee, part 2, op. cit. Verse 7 translated in Robinson, op. cit. 
132. Entire Chapter translated in Sprung et al., op. cit.; Vidyabhusana, op. 
cit; H.N. Chatterjee, part 2, op. cit. 

133. Complete translation in Sprung et al., op. cit.; Vidyabhusana, op. cit. 
Verses 1, 11 and 15 translated in Robinson, op. cit.; verses 7 and 11 in 
Oetke, p. cit. 

134. Complete translation in Vidyabhusana, op. cit. Verses 1-7 translated 
in Katz, "Nagarjuna and Wittgenstein...", op. cit. 

135. Complete translation in Vidyabhusana, op. cit. 

136. Complete translation in Sprung-et al., op. cit.; Oetke, op. cit. Sections 
3, 4, 7, 8 translated in Robinson, op. cit.. 

137. Verse 7 translated in Robinson, op. cit. 

138. Chapter translated in Sprung et al, op. cit. as well as in Anviksiki 6.3- 
4, 1973, 147-155; also in Williams, op. cit. Stanzas 1-3, 5, 8-9 translated 
in Robinson, op. cit.; 4-6 in King, op. cit.; 6 in Wayman, "Contributions to 
the Madhyamika school...", op. cit. and in Diana Ames, "Nagarjuna's 
concept of siinyata", The Pacific World 3, 1987, 15-23. 

139. Chapter translated in W. Ames thesis, op. cit. Verses 2 and 9 
translated in D.Ames, op. cit.; verses 4, 6-10 translated in Robinson, op. 
cit. 

140. Stanza 8 translated in Indra Gupta, "An enquiry into '‘real'--the 
Madhyamika way", Journal of the Department of Buddhist Studies, South 
Delhi University 11.1, 1987, 97-103. Stanza 33 translated in Christian 
Lindtner, "The Lahkavatara in early Indian Madhyamaka literature", 
Asiatische Studien 46.1, 1992, 244-279. 


141. Chapter translated in Sprung et al., op. cit.; Peter Della Santina, "The 
treatment of the self (@tman) in Madhyamaka philosophy", Journal of the 
Department of Buddhism, Delhi University 3, 1976, 8-11; Williams, op. cit. 
Verses 4 and 5 translated in King, op. cit.; 4, 5, and 7 in Streng, op. cit.; 
5-7 and 9 in I. Gupta, op. cit.; 5 in D. Ames, op. cit.; 7, 8 and 10 in 
Robinson, op. cit.; 7 in Douglas A. Fox, "Nagarjuna and Samkara", Aligarh 
Journal of Oriental Studies 5, 1988, 127-130; 7 in Franco, op.cit.; 12 in 
Lindtner, op. cit. 

142. Complete translations in K.V. Apte, "Where is the time: an exposition 
of Madhyamakakarika XIX", Journal of Shivaji University 7, 1974, 49-54; 


ENDNOTES 729 


Sprung et al., op. cit.; in J.G.Arapura, Hermeneutical Essays on Vedanta 
Topics (Delhi 1986). Partially translated in Shoson Miyamoto, "Time and 
eternity in Buddhism", Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 7.2, 1959, 
3-18. Verses 1-6 translated in Robinson, op.cit.; verses 1-4 translated in 
Oetke, op. cit. 

143. Verses 1, 2, 5-7, 10, 15-20 translated in Robinson, op. cit. 

144. Verses 1-6 translated in Oetke, op. cit.; verses 4, 14 and 21 in 
Robinson, op. cit.; 11 in Lindtner, op. cit. 

145. Chapter translated in Alex Wayman, "The Tathagata chapter of 
Nagarjuria's Mila-madhyamaka-karika", Philosophy East and West 38, 
1988, 47-57; Sprung et al., op. cit.; Williams, op. cit. Verses 1-2, 4, 11, 12, 
14, 16 in Sogen, op. cit.; verses 7-11, 16 in Streng, op. cit.; 11 in King, op. 
cit.; 11 and 16 in Robinson, op. cit. 

146. Chapter translated in Willliam L.’ Ames, "The soteriological purpose 
of Nagarjuna's philosophy: a study of Chapter 23 of the Mila- 
madhyamaka-karikas", Journal of the International Association of Buddhist 
Studies 11.2, 1988, 7-20; Sprung et al., op.cit.; Verse 1 translated by I. 
Gupta, op. cit.; verses 2, 5, 8 and 9 translated in Robinson, op. cit. 

147. Chapter translated in Robert F. Olson, "Whitehead, Madhyamika and 
the Prajfiaparamita", Philosophy East and West 25, 1975, 449-464; Sprung 
et al., op. cit.; Williams, op. cit. Verses 7, 10 and 11 translated in I. Gupta, 
op. cit.; verse 7 in Lindtner, op. cit.; verses 8-10, 14, 18-19, 36-37, 40 in 
Streng, op. cit.; verses 8-10, 18 in King, op. cit.; verses 8-11, 18, 21-25, 40 
in Robinson, op. cit.; verses 8-10, 14, 16, 19 in Sogen, op. cit.; verse 18 in 
Nagao, op. cit.; 18 in N. Aiyaswami Sastri, "Siinyata and its significance in 
Buddhism: Bulletin of Tibetology 12, 1975, 5-18; verse 18 in I T’ao-t'ien, 
“An attempt to examine the inner logical connections of the dialectical 
development from the Buddhist traditional doctrine of the satya-in- 
duplication being transmitted and maintained by Nagarjuna to the T'ien-t'ai 
Buddhist doctrine of the satya-in-triplication being created and advocated 
by Chih-I on the inquiring about the 18th verse in Ch. 24, entitled Viewing 
the Four Noble Truths, of Nagarjuna's Madhyamaka-Sastra" (summary), 
Transactions of the International Congress of Orientalists in Japan 11, 
1956, 49-50; verses 18-19 in Yensho Kanakura, Hindu-Buddhist Thought 
in India (tr. S. lida and N. Donner)(Yokohama 1980); in Wayman, 
"Contributions to the Madhyamika school...", op. cit. 

148. Chapter translated in Sprung et al., op.cit.; Stcherbatsky, op. cit.; 
Williams, op. cit. Verses 1-2, 4, 7, 11, 15 translated in Arthur Herman, 
"Skepticism and Madhyamika: how not to think about things", Philosophica 
15-16, 1986-87, 139-161; verses 3, 5 translated in Lindtner, Op. cit.; verses 
3, 24 translated in Rita Gupta, "Madhyamika dialectics: search for truth 
and soteriological analysis", Vishwabharati Journal of Philosophy 21.2, 
1985, 83-89; verses 17-18 in Robinson, op. cit.; verse 19 in Sogen, op. cit.; 


730 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


verse 19 in King, op. cit. 

149. Chapter translated in W. Ames' doctoral dissertation, op. cit. Verse 11 
translated in Robinson, op. cit. The authenticity of this Chapter is discussed 
in Tilmann Vetter, "On the authenticity of the Ratnavali", Asiatische 
Studien 46.1, 1992, 497-499. 

150. Summarized in Nalinaksha Dutt, "The Brahmajala Sutta (in the light 
of Nagarjuna's exposition)", Indian Historical Quarterly 8, 1932, 706-746. 
Verses 3, 6, 7, 9, 11, 15, 22-25 translated in Robinson, op. cit. Verse 7 
translated in D. Ames, op. cit. The authenticity of this Chapter is discussed 
by Tilmann Vetter, op.. cit., 497-499. 

151. Cf. Lindtner, op. cit., p. 70. 

152. Translations in Giuseppe Tucci, Pre-Dirindga Buddhist Texts on Logic. 
Gaekwads Oriental Series 49, 1929; Kamaleswar Bhattacharya in Journal 
of Indian Philosophy 1, 1971, 217-261 (reprinted Delhi 1978). Summarized 
by Satkari Mookerjee in Nava-Nalanda-Mahavira Research Publications | 
(Nalanda 1957) and in Ruegg, op. cit., pp. 21-23. 

153. Cf. E.H. Johnston and A. Kunst in Melanges Chinois et Bouddhiques 
9, 1951, 99-152. 

154. Cf. Lindtner, op. cit., note 74. 

155. Kamaleswar Bhattacharya, "A note on...sddhyasama...", op. cit., p. 8. 
156. Kamaleswar Bhattacharya, "Some notes on the Vigrahavyavarttani", 
Journal of Indian Philosophy 5, 1978, 237-242. 

157. In the Introduction to Johnston and Kunst's edition, op.cit. 

158. Giuseppe Tucci, "A Sanskrit biography of the siddhas and some 
questions connected with Nagarjuna", Journal of the Asiatic Society of 
Bengal 26, 1930, 125-160; reprinted in Giuseppe Tucci, Opera Minore 
(Roma 1971-72), pp. 229-244. 

159. Kamaleshwar Bhattacharya, "A note cn...sddhyasama...", op. cit.. 
160. Lindtner, op. cit., p. 71, note 10. 

161. This verse and the next, with verses 33-34, are studied in R.K. 
Sharma, Studies in Indology. Prof. Rasik Vihari Joshi Felicitation Volume 
(ed. A. Kumar et al.)(New Deihi 1988-89). 

162. Verses 36-39 are rendered into quantificational logic by Shohei 
Ichimura in Buddhist-Christian Dialogue (ed. Paul O. Ingram)(Honolulu 
1986), 95-114. 

163. Cf. Nydyastitra II.1.19 and Kamaleswar Bhattacharya, "On the 
relationship between Nagarjuna's Vigrahavyavarttani and the Nydyasitras", 
Journal of Indo-European Studies 5, 1979, 265-273. 

164. In addition, the work is translated in Pandeya and Manju, Ndgarjuna's 
Philosophy of No-Identity (Delhi 1991) and summarized in Ruegg, op. cit., 
20-21. 

165. Tibetan editions of the Vaidalyaprakarana and its Prakarana constitute 
Toh. 5226 and Toh. 5230 respectively. Both are printed in Yuichi 


ENDNOTES 731 


Kajiyama's edition (Miscellania Indologica Kiotensia 6-7, 1965, 129-155 
and in Sempa Dorje's edition (Varanasi 1974). Kajiyama, p. 130, reports 
that "S. Yamaguchi first published an exposition of the text in 1927 and 
later incorporated the work into his book, Chiikan Bukkyé Ronké, pp. 113- 
166." Kajiyama also points out that Th. Stcherbatsky was mistaken in 
identifying this text with the (lost) Pramanavihethana (also called 
Pramanavidhvamsana) (cf. Kajiyama, ibid., 129-130). 

166. Michael Hahn, Nagarjuna's Ratndvali. Volume One: The Basic Texts 
(Sanskrit, Tibetan, Chinese). Indica et Tibetica, Band 1 (Bonn 1982), pp. 
1-34. 

167. Tilmann Vetter, "On the authenticity of the Ratnavali", Asiatische 
Studien 46.1, 1992, 492-506. 

168. Giuseppe Tucci, "The Ratnavali of Nagarjuna", Journal of the Royal 
Asiatic Society 1934, 307-325; 1936, 237, 423. Partly reprinted in 
Giuseppe Tucci, Opera Minore (Roma, 1971-72), 321-336. The 100 verses 
edited by Tucci have been reprinted in P.L. Vaidya's Appendix to 
Madhyamakasastra (Buddhist Sanskrit Texts 10)(Darbhanga 1960), pp. 
299-310, and in Heramba Chatterjee Sastri, The Philosophy of Nagarjuna 
as Contained in the Ratnavali (Calcutta 1977), 83-100. These editions have 
since been superseded by Hahn's (cf. footnote 166, above). 

169. This Nagarjuna's authorship of the present text has been controverted 
by Carmen Dragonetti, "The Pratityasamutpadahrdayakarika and the 
Pratityasamutpadahrdayavyakhyana of Suddhamati", Wiener Zeitschrift fur 
die Kunde Sudasiens 22, 1978, 87-94 and "Some notes on the 
Pratityasamutpadahrdayakarika and the  Pratityasamutpada- 
hrdayavyakhyana attributed to Nagarjuna", Journal of the Department of 
Buddhist Studies, South Delhi University 6, 1979, 70-73, with a reply by 
Christian Lindtner in Praci-Jyoti: Digest of Indological Studies 26, 1982, 
167ff. 

170. Sieglinde Dietz, "The author of the Suhrllekha" in E. Steinkellner and 
H. Tauscher (eds.), Contributions on Tibetan and Buddhist Religion and 
Philosophy. Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde, Heft 
11. Proceedings of the Csoma de Koros Symposium held at Velm-Vienna, 
Austria, 13-19 September 1981. Volume 2 (Wien 1983), pp. 59-72. 

171. Lindtner, op. cit., pp. 218-224. 

172. Bharat Singh Upadhyaya in B.V. Bapat (ed.), 2500 Years of Buddhism 
(Delhi 1959), pp. 218-224. 

173. Lindtner, op. cit., p. 225. 

174. In Giuseppe Tucci, Minor Buddhist Texts (Roma 1956, 1958; Japan 
1978; Delhi 1986), pp. 193-208. 

175. Cf. Journal of Indian Philosophy 13, 1985, 1-54. 

176. This set of terms, first coined by Democritus, reflects a way of 
thinking common to Greek and Indian philosophers in general. The latter 


732 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


spoke of the two bodies (kaya) of the Bhagavat in terms conceived as a 
cosmic mahdpurusa. So the two kinds of cosmos provides the classical 
Greek counterpart to two bodies and two truths in ancient India. 
177. Here, as elsewhere, Nagarjuna alludes to the Lankdvatarasiltra. Cf. C. 
Lindtner in Asiatische Studien XLVI.1, 1992, 244-279. 
178. Like lokavyavahara, lokasamvyavahdra, a common synonym of 
samvrtisatya. 
179. A Chinese translation by An Shih-kao, who flourished in the second 
century A.D., is recorded in the catalogues. The earliest redaction of the 
text is in two fragments of a Chinese translation dating from 420-479. 
This is a vaipulya or extensive text with a vast history. It evidently 
underwent sizable expansion and revision as it found its way to various 
parts of Asia. There is no sure way of telling which portions are the earlier. 
The complete Sanskrit text, discovered in Gilgit, is edited by 
Nalinaksha Dutt in Gilgit Manuscripts 2.1-3 and by P.L. Vaidya, Buddhist 
Sanskrit Texts 2 (Darbhanga 1961). There is no complete translation. 
Footnotes to Chapters in the following summary give details of editions 
and translations of specific chapters. The titles of sections are taken from 
Luis O. Gomez and Jonathan A. Silk, Studies in the Literature of the Great 
Vehicle (Ann Arbor 1989). 
180. Cf. Konstantin Regamey, Three Chapters from the Samadhirdjasiitra 


Gn Eola (Warsaw 1938), reprinted by Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi 1994, 
p. 10. 


181. Nalinaksha Dutt, op. cit., p. iii. 

182. Vaidya, op. cit. 

183. Gomez and Silk, op. cit. 

pe as Mitra, The Sanskrit Buddhist Literature of Nepal (Calcutta 
185. Edited by Sheiren Matsunami in Taisho Daigal i 

60, 1975. Translated into English in Gomez/Silk, Coan ee 
186. Edited in Matsunami, ibid., and translated in Gomez/Silk, op. cit. 
187. Edited in Matsunami, ibid., and translated in Gomez/Silk, op. cit. 
188. Edited in Matsunami, ibid., and in Nepali in John Rockwell, Jr.'s 1980 
M.A. Thesis at The Naropa Institute, Boulder, Colorado. French translation 
by Jean Filliozat, "La mort volontaire par le feu et la tradition bouddhique 
indienne", Journal Asiatique 251, 1963. 

189. Edited in Matsunami, ibid. Translated from Nepali by Rockwell, ibid. 
190. Edited in Matsunami, ibid. Edited and translated in Regamey, op.cit. 
191. Edited in Rockwell, op. cit. Edited and translated in Christopher 
Cuppers, The IXth Chapter of the Samadhirajasiitra (Stuttgart 1990). 
192. Edited in Tibetan and translated in Mark Tatz' M.A. Thesis at the 
University of Washington 1972 titled Revelation in Madhyamika Buddhism. 
193. Partially edited by Sarat Chandra Das and Hari Mohan Vidyabhusana 


ENDNOTES 733 


(Calcutta 1896; Shanghai 1940). 

194. Edited in Das and Vidyabhusana, ibid. 

195. Partly edited in Russian by G. Bongard-Levin, "A new fragment of the 
Sanskrit Samadhirajasiitra from Central Asia", Sanskrit and Indian Culture 
(Moscow 1979), pp. 62-72, with English summary on p. 252. 

196. Edited and translated in Regamey, op. cit. 

197. Translated in Regamey, op. cit. 

198. Most of this Chapter is translated into French in Filliozat, op. cit. 
199. Most of this Chapter is translated into German by Friedrich Weller, 
“Der arme Heinrich in Indien", Orientalistischer Literaturzeitung 68, 1973, 
437-448. 

200. T.474-476, translated into Chinese by Shi Ken in 252, and by others 
earlier, though their translations are lost. Etienne Lamotte, in 
L'Enseignement de Vimalakirti (Louvain 1962; translated by Sara Boin as 
The Teaching of Vimalakirti, Pali Text Society, Translation Series 1976; 
also Sacred Books of the Buddhists 32, 1976), gives a thorough review of 
available information about the various translations into Chinese, Japanese, 
Tibetan and Sogdian of this work, as well as a concordance, together with 
analysis. Nakamura, op. cit., p. 224, reviewing the literature, states that 
this siitra “was already existent as early as prior to 200 or 150 A.D.", citing 
Japanese authorities. To Lamotte's and Nakamura's bibliographical 
information should be added the following: Richard B. Mather, "Vimalakirti 
and gentry Buddhism", History of Religions 8, 1968, 60-73; Edward 
Hamlin, "Magical updya in the Vimalakirtinirdesa", Journal of the 
International Association of Buddhist Studies 11.1, 1988, 89-122. There are 
numerous partial translations. An alternative summary to that by A.K. 
Warder, quoted here, is by Charles Luk (Berkeley 1972). 

201. See Warder, op. cit., pp. 397-399. 

202. Noble Ross Reat, The Salistamba Siitra (Motilal Banarsidass: Delhi 
1993). 

203. Reat, ibid., p. 4. 

204. Reat, ibid., pp. 15-16, gives a thorough review of the literature on this 
text. Since this work is absent from the Bibliography volume of the 
Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies we give here the major references: L. 
de la Vallee Poussin, Théorie des douze causes (London 1913), containing 
a reconstructed Sanskrit text and a Tibetan text; N. Aiyaswami Sastri, Arya 
Sdlistamba Siitra (Theosophical Society: Adyar 1950), with Tibetan text 
and reconstruction of the Sanskrit, reprinted in Mah@yana-Siitra-Samgraha 
(ed. P.L. Vaidya), Buddhist Sanskrit Texts 17 (Darbhanga 1961); 
V.V.Gokhale's version found in the same volume of Buddhist Sanskrit 
Texts. 

205. Cf. Tom Tillemans, Materials for the Study of Aryadeva, Dharmapala 
and Candrakirti (Wien 1990), pp. 5-7. 


734 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


206. See Vidhusekhara Bhattacharya, "Aryadeva", Indian Historical 
Quarterly 9, 1933, 978 and P.S. Sastri in Indian Historical Quarterly 31, 
1955, 193-202. 

207. This work has been edited and translated by Karen Lang in Indiske 
Studier 7 (Copenhagen 1986), and partly edited in H.P. Shastri, Memoires 
of the Asiatic Society of Bengal 3.8, 1914, 449-514 and by Bhagchandra 
Jain Bhaskar (Nagpur 1971). Summaries are to be found in Lang, ibid., pp. 
16-21, and in Ruegg, op. cit., pp. 51-53. For relations between passages in 
this work and texts such as Sitrasamuccaya, Bodhicittavivarana, 
Bhavasamkrantistitra, Trimsikd, et. cf. Lindtner, "The Lankavatara...", op. 
cit., Excursi 1-6. 

208. Studied in Karen C. Lang, "Aryadeva and Candrakirti on the dharma 
of kings", Asiatische Studien 46.1, 1992, 232-243. 

209. Edited and translated by V. Bhattacharya in Proceedings of the All- 
India Oriental Conference 4, 1928, 831-871. 

210. Edited and translated into French by P.L. Vaidya, Etudes sur Aryadeva 
et son Catussataka (Paris 1923). Edited by Vidhusekhara Bhattacharya at 
Visvabharati Studies 2.2, 1931. 

211. Edited and translated into French in Vaidya, ibid. Translated into 
French by Jacques May, (1) "Aryadeva et Candrakirti sur le permanence", 
Indianisme et Bouddhisme offerts a Msgr. Etienne Lamotte. Publications de 
l'Institut Orientaliste du Louvain 23 (Louvain-la-Neuve 1980), pp. 215-232; 
(2) Bulletin de l'Ecole Francaise d'Extreme-Orient 69, 1981, 75-96; (3) 
Asiatische Studien 35.2, 1981, 57-66; (4) Etudes de Lettres, Revue de la 
Faculte des Lettres de l'Universite de Lausann 19982, n.s. 3, 45-76; (5) 
“Aryadeva V" in Shinpi Shiso ronshu/Studies of Mysticism in Honour of the 
1150th Anniversary of Kobo Daishi's Nirvanam. Acta Indologica 6: 
Naritesan Shinshoii 1984, 115-144. Edited in V. Bhattacharya, 
Visvabharati Studies 2.2, 1931. 

212. The close relation of this verse to 138.Lankdvatarasiitra 3.70 is 
discussed in Lindtner, "The Lankavatarasittra...", op. cit., pp. 256-258. 
213. Edited and translated into French in Vaidya, Etudes..., op. cit. Edited 
by V. Bhattacharya, Visvabharati Studies 1931. 

214. Edited and translated into French in Vaidya, Etudes..., op. cit. Edited 
in V. Bhattacharya, ibid. Outlined by Ichigo Ogawa in Annual Report of 
Researches of the Otani University 29, 1976, pp. 6-8. 

215. Edited and translated into French in Vaidya, Etudes..., op. cit. Edited 
by V. Bhattacharya, Visvabharati Studies 1931. Edited and translated into 
French in Tom J. F. Tillemans, Materials for the Study of Aryadeva, 
Dharmapala and Candrakirti. Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und 
Buddhismuskunde, heft 24.1 (Wien 1990). 

216. Edited and translated into French in Vaidya, Etudes..., op. cit. Edited 
in V. Bhattacharya, ibid. Edited and translated in Tillemans, ibid. 


ENDNOTES 735 


217. Edited and translated into French in Vaidya, Etudes..., op. cit. Edited 
in V. Bhattacharya, ibid. 

218. Edited and translated into French in Vaidya, Etudes..., op. cit. Edited 
in V. Bhattacharya, ibid. 

219. Edited and translated into French in Vaidya, Etudes..., op. cit. Edited 
in V. Bhattacharya, ibid. 

220. Tucci in Pre-Dinnaga Buddhist Texts, op. cit., p. 14. 

221. Ibid., pp. xii-xiv. Robinson, op. cit., pp. 210-211, translated Seng 
Chao's preface. 

222. See Lang, Catuhsataka, op. cit., pp. 10-14. 

223. Editions can be found at Peking 5234 Tsa f. 157a, Tohoku 3234 Tsa 
138b, and with commentary at Taisho 1572, volumes 30, pp. 250b-252c; 
Peking 5235, vol. 95, Tsa ff. 157a-165b; Tohoku 2835 Tsa 138b-146b. A 
Japanese translation by R. Hadani appears in Kokuyaku Issaikyo, Chugan- 
bu, vol. 3, Tokyo 1976, pp. 1-19. 

224. This is Taisho 291. It was translated into Chinese around 300 by 
Dharmaraksa. 

225. The Chinese translation, T. 1551, was made by Narendrayagas 
together with others in 563. Cf. Charles Willemen, The Essence of 
Metaphysics. Abhidharmahrdaya (Bruxelles 1975), pp. xiv-xv, for 
information about the translator. 

226. Willemen, ibid., p. xiv. 

227. Willemen, ibid., p. xiii. 

228. Cf. Edward Conze, The Prajftaparamitd Literature (The Hague 1960), 
pp. 31-33. The first fourteen chapters are published in three volumes in 
Sanskrit by Pratap Chandra Ghosha, Bibliotheca Indica 115, 1888-1895. 
Sections of the Tibetan text are provided by M. Lalou (cf. Conze, ibid., p. 
31). Chapter 9 is translated into French by Sylvain Levi in "Ysa", Mémorial 
Sylvain Lévi (Paris 1937). 

229. Conze, ibid., p. 10. 

230. Conze, ibid., p. 32. 

231. Conze, ibid. 

232. Conze, ibid. 

233. Cf. Conze, ibid., pp. 34-35. The work is translated in Conze, The 
Large Sittra..., op. cit. 

234. Edited and translated by Conze, ibid. Portions are also edited by 
Bidyabinod, Memoirs of the Architectural Survey of India 32, 1927, and by 
Sten Konow, "Central Asian fragments of the Astadasasaha- 
srikaprajiidparamitasiitra and of an unidentified text", Memoirs of the 
Architectural Survey of India 69, 1942. See also Conze, "Preliminary note 
on the Prajiiaparamita manuscript", Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 
1950, 32-36. 


736 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


235. T. 1360; Toh. 141, 526, 916. It is edited in Sanskrit, Tibetan and 
Chinese and translated by K. Mimaki in Report of the Japanese Association 
for Tibetan Studies 23, 1977. Mimaki has also published the Introduction 
to his edition/translation at Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 25.2, 
1977, 29-36. 

236. T. 169 and 171, translated into Chinese by Shi Ken (250 A.D.) 

237. T. 533, translated into Chinese by Shi Ken (250). 

238. T. 559-561; Toh. 171. Partially translated into French by Leon Feer, 
Fragments extraits du Kandjour (Annales du Musee Guimet 5, 1883). 
239, T. 713-715, translated into Chinese by Shi Ken (250). 

240. T. 597, translated into Chinese by Shi Ken in 250. 

241. T. 1356-1359. Earliest translation into Chinese by Shi Ken in 260. 
242. T. 632-634, translated into Chinese by Shi Ken in 250. 

243. T. 808-809, translated into Chinese by Shi Ken in 250 

244. T. 692-694. The earliest Chinese translation is by an anonymous 
translator dated between A.D. 25 and 220. 

245. Earliest translation into Chinese by Haku En or Po-yen of the Wei 
dynasty in 258. T. 310, number 27 of the Maharatnakiita collection, is 
Bodhiriici's Chinese version, translated into English in Chang, Treasury, op. 
cit. pp. 243-255. Another Chinese translation is T. 329, and into Tibetan 
there is P760.27. 

246. Edited by Christian Lindtner (Bern 1984). 

247. Cf. Matrceta's SugatapaficatrimSatstotra in praise of the thirty-five 
Buddhas. 

248. The numerous hymns to the Buddha in early Mahayana from the 
hands of teachers such as Nagarjuna and Matrceta testify to the human 
need of bhakti, the need to have and worship a "strong leader" (as opposed 
to some silly "star") who teaches and practises for all to see a dharma that 
basically consists of ahimsd and Siinyatd, i.e., yoga in a practical and in a 
theoretical sense, who has, as it were, two bodies. The same pattern is, 
mutatis mutandis, to be found in Jainism and in the Krishnaism of the 
Bhagavadgita. Mahayana Buddhism, therefore, should be seen as but a 
specific form of an early pan-Indian religious movement with ancient 
Aryan roots. (CL) 

249. Ruegg summarizes this work, op. cit., p. 55. 

250. Ruegg, op. cit., p. 54, note 54. 

251. Ruegg, op. cit., pp. 55-56. The text is edited by Wogihara and 
Tsushida from Tokyo (1934-35, 1958) and by R. Hikata, 
Suvikrantivikrantivikrami-Pariprecha-Prajfiaparamita-Siitra (Fukuoka 1958), 
pp. 1-2. It is translated by Edward Conze in Buddhist Texts through the 
Ages (Oxford 1954), pp. 147-149. Cf. Conze, The Prajfiaparamita 
Literature, op. cit., pp. 94-95 for added information. 

252. Quoted from Ruegg, op. cit., p. 55. 


ENDNOTES 737 


253. bhavena, "really, truly" or "resolutely, devotedly, affectionately." 
254. Jean Przyluski, "Sautrantika et Darstantika", Rocznik Orientalistyezny 
8, 1932, 14-14-24. 

255. J. Kato, "Kumaralata et Srilata" in Indianisme et Bouddhism. Mélanges 
offerts 4 Msgr. Etienne Lamotte. Publications de I'Institute Orientliaste de 
Louvain 23 (Louvain-la-Neuve 1980), pp. 197-213. 

256. Cf. Przyluski, op. cit., as well as Prayluski, "Darstantika, Sautrantika 
and Sarvastivada", Indian Historical Quarterly 16, 1940, 246-252. 

257. This fragment was edited by H. Liiders in Asia Major 1926. However, 
the ascription is controversial; cf. Kato, op. cit. and Sylvain Lavi, "La 
Drstantapankti et son auteur", Journal Asiatique (juillet-septembre) 1927, 
95-126, as well as Lévi, "Encore Agvaghosa", Journal Asiatique (october- 
décembre) 1928, 193-216, Jean Przyluski, "AsSvaghosa et la 
Kalpanamanditika", Bulletins de la Classe des Lettres et des sciences 
morales et politiques, Academie Royale de Belgique, 5th series, Tome XVI, 
1930, and Przyluski, "Sautrantika et Darstantika...", op. cit. 

258. Part 12 of the Mahasamnipata collection. Translated into Chinese by 
Dharmaraksa as T. 403. It also exists in Tibetan, Tohoku 175. It has been 
translated by Jens Braarvig, Aksayamatinirdesa, Volume II (Oslo 1993), pp. 
1-591. Two discussions pertaining to it are Alex Wayman, "The samadhi 
lists of the Aksayamatinirdesa-siitra", Acta Orientalia (Budapest) 34, 1980, 
305-318, and Leslie S. Kawamura, "The Aksayamatinirdegasiitra and Mi 
pham's mKhas ‘jug" in E. Steinkellner and H. Tauscher (eds.), Contributions 
on Tibetan and Buddhist Religion and Philosophy. Wiener Studien zur 
Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde, Heft 11, Volume 2 (Wien 1983), pp. 
131-146. The summary provided here is excerpted from the latter article. 
259. Kawamura provides the Tibetan terms and textual pagination, which 
we omit. We also use Kawamura’s own translations here rather than those 
adopted in the Volume elsewhere. 

260. T. 118-120, translated into Chinese by Dharmaraksa around 300 A.D. 
According to Nakamura, op. cit., p. 23, this work is quoted in the 
138.Lankavatarasitra. 

261. The earliest translation of this work into Chinese is by Dharmaraksa 
around 300 A.D. Buddhaganta's Chinese translation, T. 310 (32), is 
translated in Chang, Treasury, op. cit., pp. 115-133. 

262. Translated into Chinese by An Hokin in 300. 

263. T. 427-428 and T. 430-431. T. 427 is a translation by Dharmaraksa 
around 300. 

264. T. 425 was translated into Chinese by Dharmaraksa in about 300. The 
work has been translated by Sten Konow in Saka Versions of the 
Bhadrakalpikasiitra (Oslo 1929). 

265. Nakamura, op. cit., p. 178. 

266. T. 310 (21) and T. 324. The latter is a Chinese translation by 


738 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Dharmaraksa (300). It has been translated twice, by Constantin Regamey, 
The Bhadramayakaravyakarana (Warsaw 1938) and in Chang, Treasury, 
op. cit., pp. 115-133. 

267. Regamey, ibid., pp. 3, 9. 

268. T. 810, translated into Chinese by Dharmaraksa in 300. 

269. T. 534-536. T. 534 is a Chinese translation by Dharmaraksa. 

270. T. 378, translated by Dharmaraksa, and T. 379, a later translation. Cf. 
Ratna Handurakande at Encyclopedia tf Buddhism 3.4, 1977, 715-716, 
who gives a generous summary of T. 379. 

271. Chinese Shih-ti ching (T. 287 (22), 279 (26), 285-286, and in Tibetan 
in portions of Toh. 44. A portion of the Avatamsakasiitra, this work is 
available in Sanskrit and edited by Ryuko Kondo (Tokyo 1936; Kyoto 
1983). An older edition by Johannes Rahder (Le Museon 39, 1926, 125- 
252) is available as revised by P.L. Vaidya (Buddhist Sanskrit Texts 7, 
Darbhanga 1967). It has been translated into English (including the 
quotations in our summary) by Megumu Honda in "Annotated translation 
of the Dagabhiimika Siitra (revised by Johannes Rahder)" in D. Sinor (ed.), 
Studies in South, East and Central Asia (presented to Prof. Raghu 
Vira)(New Delhi 1968), 115-276. 

272. These ten stages are also described in Hirakawa, op. cit., pp. 307-308. 
273. Hirakawa, op. cit., p. 281. 

274. T. 435 translated into Chinese by Dharmaraksa in 300. 

275. #12 of the Ratnakiita collection (T. 310), also translated into Chinese 
by Dharmaraksa around 300. The work is translated into German by 
Huebotter in Mitteilungen der Deutschen Gesellschaft fur Natur- und 
Volkerkunde Ostasien 36 (Tokyo 1932), Teil C. 26 pp. 

276. T. 813-814 and Toh. 207. The first of these is a translation into 
Chinese by Dharmamitra (266-313). Nakamura, op. cit., p. 231, says this 
text is quoted in the Lankdvatarasiitra. 

277. Nakamura, op. cit., p. 171 

278. T. 345, translated into Chinese by Dharmaraksa around 300. 

279. T. 245-246. Summarized in Conze, The Prajfidparamita Literature, op. 
cit., pp. 75-77 and in M. W. de Visser, Ancient Buddhism in Japan (1928- 
35), I, 116-189. 

280. T. 481-482 (Chinese) and Toh. 174 (Tibetan). T 481 is a Chinese 
translation by Dharmaraksa. 

281. T. 477-479. The first of these is a translation into Chinese by 
Dharmaraksa (265-318). According to Nakamura, op. cit., p. 285, this is 
"a continuation of the ‘Spotless Fame Sittra", ie., of 
46.Vimalakirtinirdesasitra. 

282. T. 297 (3); T 399. 

283. Another of Dharmaraksa's (265-318) Chinese translations, this is T. 
349. Cf. Nakamura, op. cit., p. 180, notes 43-46 for references. An 


ENDNOTES 739 


alternative title is Maitreyabodhisattvasiitra. 

284. Translated into Chinese by Dharmaraksa (265-318) and others later, 
this is the fifteenth section of the Ratnakiita collection (T. 310). Cf. the 
partial translation by Etienne Lamotte in T'oung Pao 48, 1960, 20-23. A 
later Chinese translation by Siksananda (685-699) is the basis for the 
portion trenslated in Chang, Treasury, op. cit., pp. 164-188. 

285. T. 817, translated into Chinese by Dharmaraksa (300). In Tibetan, 
Toh. 96. 

286. T. 589, translated into Chinese by Dharmaraksa (300). 

287. Translated into Chinese as T. 112 by Hok6 around 300. 

288. T. 460, translated into Chinese by Dharmaraksa (300). 

289. T. 61-63, the first of which is a translation into Chinese by 
Dharmaraksa (300). 

290. T. 433, Chinese translation by Dharmaraksa (300). 

291. #47 of the Ratnakiita collection. Also in Tibetan, Toh. 91. The 
Ratnakiita translaticn is the work of Dharmaraksa (300). 

292. T. 433, Chinese translation by Dharmaraksa (300). 

293. T. 461, by Dharmaraksa (300), T. 362 and Toh. 118. 

294. T. 263, the earliest of several Chinese translations, was made by 
Dharmaraksa in 286 A.D.--at that time the work had 26 chapters. The 
standard Chinese translation, though, is by Kumarajiva (T. 262) in 405-46. 
T.265 is another Chinese translation, and a Tibetan translation is found in 
Toh. 113. For a thorough review of the textual history of the work see 
Hirakawa, op. cit., pp. 282-286. For an exhaustive résumé of the literature 
on this work one should consult Nakamura, op. cit., pp. 183-188, Portions 
of the work are translated in a variety of collections; see Bibliography, 
Volume One of the Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies (ed. K.H. Potter), 
Third Edition 1995, #103 for these and for references to secondary 
materials, 

295. Translated into Chinese by Dharmaraksa (300) in T. 598. Other 
translations into Chinese (T. 599, T. 601) and into Tibetan (Toh. 153-155). 
Chapter 14 is translated in Diana Paul, Women in Buddhism (Berkeley 
1979). pp. 235-298. 

296. #10 of the Ratnakiita collection. Translated into Chinese by 
Dharmaraksa in 200 (T. 315). Also translated into Tibetan (Toh. 54). 
Translated into English in Chang, Treasury, pp. 134-147, 

297. Translated into Chinese as T. 381 by Dharmaraksa (300). 

298. Translated into Chinese as T. 274 by Dharmaraksa (300). 

299. Chinese translations are T. 310 (37) and T. 343-344. Tibetan 
translation, Toh. 47. 

300. This is #48 of the Ratnakiita collection. According to Alex and Hideko 
Wayman, The Lion's Roar of Queen Srimala (New York 1974), p. 5, where 
the work is translated, it was composed in the Andhra region in the third 


740 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


century. Only a few sentences have survived in Sanskrit. The earliest 
Chinese translation appears to be by Dharmaksema around 420. This siitra, 
however, is obviously known to the author of the Lankavatdrasiitra, who 
seems to have lived during the fourth century. 

The present summary by the Waymans is taken from their 
translation, pp. 21-23. 

Alex Wayman, "The Mahasamghika and the Tathagatagarbha 
(Buddhist doctrinal history, study 1)", Journal of the International 
Association of Buddhist Studies 1.1, 1978, 35-50, traces the beginnings of 
the Tathagatagarbha doctrine to this text, and argues that it represents 
Mahasamghika leanings. He also explicitly argues for the location of our 
text's source in Andhra district. 

301. T. 567 is a translation by Dharmaraksa (300). 

302. T. 562 is a translation into Chinese by Dharmaraksa (300). 

303. T. 310 (30), Ts. 334-346. Translated into Chinese by Dharmaraksa 
(300). There are translations of this stitra in Paul, op. cit., pp. 292-301 
and in Chang, Treasury, op. cit., pp. 41-70. 

304, #36 of the Ratnakiita collection (T. 310), translated into Chinese by 
Dharmaraksa (300). 

305. #4 of the Ratnakiita collecton (T. 310), translated into Chinese by 
Dharmaraksa (300). 

306. Also known as Tathdagatagunajfidnacintyavisayavaranirdesasitra. T. 
310 (3) and T. 312, and in Tibetan Toh. 47. Portions are translated in 
various places; See K.H. Potter (ed.), Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies: 
Bibliography, Third Edition, op. cit., #114 on p. 134. 

307. Also known as Tathdgatamahdkarunanirdesasiitra, #1 of the 
Mahasamnipata collection (T. 397). Also T. 398, translated into Chinese 
by Dharmaraksa in 300. David Seyfort Ruegg reports that this text is 
mentioned in the Mahdnirvanasiitra and in the Mahdbherisitra and is 
therefore prior to the Lartkavatdrasiitra. 

308. #29 of the Ratnakiita collection (T. 310). Translated into Chinese by 
H6k6 in 300 (T. 332). Another Chinese translation is T. 333. It is 
translated into English in Paul, Women in Buddhism, op. cit., pp. 27-50. 
309. #38 of the Ratnakiita collection (T. 310). Translated into Chinese by 
Dharmaraksa in 300 (T. 345). Tibetan translations at Toh. 82 and 261. 
Translation of the Ratnakiita version in Chang, Treasury, pp. 427-465. 
310. T. 513, translated into Chinese by Dharmaraksa in 300. 

311. Translated from Bodhiruci's version (T. 310 (20)) in Chang, Treasury, 
pp. 129-162. This text is translated as Toh. 64 into Tibetan. 

312, #38 of the Ratnakiita collection (T. 310). Translated into Chinese by 
Haku Hosso in 300 (T. 330). Also translated into Chinese as T. 331 and 
into Tibetan as Toh. 72. 

313. T. 310 (33), T. 338-339 and Toh. 77. T. 338 is a translation by 


ENDNOTES 741 


Dharmaraksa, T. 310 (33) is a translation by Nieh Tao-chen of the Western 
Chin. This last is translated Chang, Treasury, pp. 73-97. 

314. T. 585-587 and Toh. 160. T. 585 is a Chinese translation by 
Dharmaraksa (300). 

315. Cf. P.V. Bapat in Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Institute 15.3-4, 
1935; in Indian Culture 1.3, 1935, 455-459 and 3, 1937, 743-746. 

316. Fragments of this are edited in H. Hoffmann, Bruchstiicke des 
Atanatikasiitra aus den Zentral Asiatisch Sanskrit Kanon der Buddhisten 
(Leipzig 1939). 

317. This text constitutes T. 1646 (Nanjio 1274), translated by Kumarajiva 
into Chinese in 412 A.D. 

318. Volume One (Baroda 1975) contains the edition, Volume Two 
(Baroda 1978) the translation. 

319. This section provides a matrkd for each of the four noble truths. They 
are set out in K. 68-76, where Katsura discusses Harivarman's use of 
matrkds here and elsewhere in the text. 

320. 20 pairs, 5 triples, 9 quadruples, 1 quintuple, 8 sextuples, 1 septuple, 
1 octuple, 1 nontuple, 1 decatuple, 1 dodecatuple. Cf. K.66-68. 

321. This entire section is translated in K.33-38 as "Document I". 

322. Katsura (K, p. 42) lists those who believe in the intermediate state as 
the Pirvagailas, Vatsiputriyas, Sammitiyas, Sarvastivadins, and perhaps the 
Darstantika-Sautrantikas, and those who oppose it as the Mahasamghikas, 
Mahisasakas, Dharmaguptakas and Theravadins. 

323. There are the Andhakas, Vatsiputriyas, Sammitiyas, Bhadrayaniyas 
and Sarvastivadins, according to K., p. 43. 

324. There are the Mahasamghikas, Mahisdsakas, Theravadins and 
Dharmaguptakas, according to K, p. 43. 

325. Pilrvasailas, Vatsiputriyas, Sammitiyas, Bhadrayaniyas and 
Sarvastivadins, according to K, p. 43. 

326. The Mahasamghikas, Mahisasakas, Theravadins and Darstantika- 
Sautrantikas, according to K, p. 43. 

327. Mahasamghikas, Andhakas and Dharmaguptakas, according to K, pp. 
43-44, 

328. Say the Sarvastivadins along with Harivarman; cf. K, p. 43. 

329. Sarvastivadins and Theravadins, along with Harivarman (K., p. 44). 
Katsura notes, however, that Harivarman's “notion of anuSayas...is 
significantly different from (that) of the Sarvastivadins and Theravadins 
and he does not accept caitasikas as an independent category apart from 
citta, nor association between citta and caitasikas." 

330. The view of the Mahasamghikas, Vatsiputriyas, Sammitiyas, 
Darstantika-Sautrantikas, Mahisasakas and Dharmaguptakas, says Katsura 
(k., p. 44). 

331. The view in question is that of the Mahisasikas. Cf. K., p. 45. 


742 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


332. This section is translated in K., pp. 116-118. 

333. Much of this section is translated in K., pp. 120-124. 

334. 60-64 are translated in large part in K., pp. 134-138. 

335. According to K., in the following argument Harivarman takes the side 
of Buddhadeva, the Darstantika-Sautrantikas and the Andhakas against 
that of the Sarvastivadins and Theravadins. 

336. Sections 65-67 are translated on pp. 139-143 of K. 

337. 68-72 are translated in K., pp. 145-149. 

338. 73-74 translated in K., pp. 152-153. 

339. 75-76 are translated in K., pp. 155-157. 

340. This paragraph summarizes a section that is translated in K., pp. 171- 
173. 

341. See C.D. Priestley, "Emptiness in the Satyasiddhi", Journal of Indian 
Philosophy 1, 1970-71, 30-39 for summary and discussion of this Book. 
342. This section is translated in K., p. 160. 

343. The following three paragraphs summarize a section that is translated 
in K., pp. 175-178. 

344, This paragraph is also summarized in K., pp. 179-181. 

345. This section is translated in K., pp. 192-193. 

346. Partly translated into French by Louis de la Vallee Poussin in 
Melanges chinois et bouddhiques 5, 193 1, pp. 203-204. 

347. This section is translated into French by Louis de la Vallee Poussin in 
Melanges chinois et bouddhiques 5, 1936-37, 204-215, 

348. This is #26 of the Ratnakiita collection, translated anonymously into 
oe between 265-316 A.D. Other Chinese translations are T. 895 and 
349, Translated into Chinese anonymously between 265-317 as T. 79-81. 
350. Translated into Chinese by Dharmaraksa in 300, according to 
Nakamura, op. cit., p. 192. 

351. According to Paul Pelliot "the 12th or the last, and undoubtedly, the 
oldest chapter of the Fo-chouo-ta-kouan-ting-chen-tchou-king (Nanjio 167) 
was translated by Srimitra between 317 and 322 A.D." from Chinese (cf. 
Paul Pelliot, "Le Bhaisajyaguru", Bulletin de I'Ecole Francais d'Extreme- 
Orient 3, 1903, 33-37). Translations are to be found at T. 449-451, T. 
1331 (12) and Toh. 503-504. A thorough discussion of it is provided in 
Volume 1 of Nalinaksha Dutt's Gilgit Manuscripts, op. cit., pp. 48-57, with 
the text edited on pp. 1-32 of the Sanskrit materials. It has been 
translated several times (cf. Potter, Bibliography, op. cit.). The summary 
Provided here is taken from Paul Pelliot's French summary referred to 
above, as rendered by Dutt, ibid., pp. 51 ff with emendations and 
additions. The work has been translated in Raoul Birnbaum, The Healing 
Buddha (Boulder, Colo. 1979) and S. Sen, "Two medical texts in Chinese 
translations", Visva-Bharati Annals 1, 1945, 70-95. 


ENDNOTES 743 


352. According to John Keenan (Original purity and the focus of early 
Yogacara", Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Scholars 
5.2, 1982, 7-18), who translates a few passages, the work "is extant only 
in fragments quoted in other texts. These have been collected in Yuki 
Reimon, Yuishikiron yori mitaru yuishiki shisdshi (Tokyo 1935), pp. 240- 
250. Six quotations appear in Asaiga's Mahdyanasamgraha-sastra, one in 
his Abhidharmasamuccaya, and one in K'uei-chi's Weishih erh shih lun shu- 
chi. The text is clearly before Asanga." (ibid., footnote 17, p. 17). 

353. This work has been edited twice (by Nishio Kyoo, The 
Buddhabhimisitra and the Buddhabhiimivyakhyana (Nagoya 1939), and 
by John Keenan in his doctoral dissertation of 1980 at the University of 
Wisconsin. The summary below is provided in Keenan's "Pure Land 
systematics in India: the Buddhabhimisitra and the trikdya doctrine", The 
Pacific World 3, 1987, 29-35. In his article Keenan argues that this siitra 
antedates the Samdhinirmocanasitra (our #136 below), for which he says 
it was the source. 

354. Of this translation there is a very old manuscript (Stein 996 - Giles 
4335) found in Tun-huang, dated year 3 of T'ai-ho of the Northern Wei 
G.e., 479 A.D.). It is the oldest Tun-huang manuscript and covers the end 
of the third chapter. There is a Japanese translation by Watanabe U. and 
Mizuno K. in KIK, Bidon-bu, Vols. XX and XXI, and a study of the second 
chapter by F. Watanabe in Gatare Dhammapala et al., eds., Buddhist 
Studies in honour of Hammalavai Saddhatissa (Nugagoda, Sri Lanka 
1984). 

355. A Chinese translation is T. 1555. The work has been reconstructed 
into Sanskrit with Vasubandhu's commentary by N. Aiyasvami Sastri 
(Visvabharati Annals 10, 1951, 1-54). Louis de la Vallee Poussin notes that 
Vasubandhu cites a Vasumitra (different from the master of the 
Mahavibhasa) whom Vasubandhu terms a Sautrantika. However, Poussin 
finds no Sautrantika leanings in this work. Cf. Poussin's French translation 
of Vasubandhu's Abhidharmakosa and Bhdsya (Paris 1923-31; English 
translation by Leo Pruden, Berkeley 1988-1990), Volume 6, xliii-xlv. 
356. There are two Chinese versions, T. 762, translated by Fa-hsien in 982- 
1000, and T. 763, translated by Chin-tsun-chi around 1113. These "differ 
enormously", according to N.H. Samtani in his edition of this work at 
Tibetan Sanskrit Works Series 13, (Patna 1971), p. 33. In addition, there 
are several manuscripts from Tibet and Nepal, used by Samtani in 
preparing his edition. The text is referred to by Yasomitra (8th century). 
The translation by Ms. A. Ferrari (Atti della Reale Accademia d'Italie. 
Memoire. Classe di Scienze morali et storiche. Series VII, fasc. 13, Roma 
1944, pp. 535-625) is of only a fragment of the text. 

357. For bibliography cf. K.H.Potter (ed.), Bibliography. Third Edition, op. 
cit., #135 on pp. 142-143. 


744 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


358. Lambert Schmithausen, Alayavijfiana. On the Origins and the Early 
Development of the Central Concept of Yogdcdra Philosophy. Studia 
Philologica Buddhica IVa-b, in two volumes (Tokyo 1987), Part One, p. 12; 
also cf. Stanley Weinstein, "The Glayavijfiana in early Yogacara Buddhism: 
a comparison of its meaning in the Samdhinirmocanasiitra and the 
Vijfiaptimatratasiddhi of Dharmapala", Kokusai Toho Gakusha Kaigikiyo 3, 
1959, 46-58, where sizable sections of the text are translated. 

359. The translation of this passage is taken from Paul J. Griffiths et al., 
The Realm of Awakening (New York 1989), pp. 5-6. 

360. The Akutobhayd is edited by Max Walleser (Materialen zur Kunde des 
Buddhismus 2, 1923), reconstructed by R.C. Pandeya (Delhi 1988-89), and 
translated into German by Max Walleser (Die Mittlere Lehre des Nagarjuna 
nach der Chinesischen Version tibertragen, (Heidelberg 1912). 

361. The Prajfiapradipatika (Peking no. 5259) of Avalokitavrata lists eight 
major commentaries on the Miilamadhyamakakarikds, beginning with 
Nagarjuna's own (fol. 85a; no title is mentioned). The colophon of the 
Akutobhayd itself contains an identical list. The Bodhimargadipapatijika 
(Peking no. 5344) of Dipamkaragrijiiana specifically refers to the 
Akutobhayd as Nagarjuna's commentary (fol. 324b). 

362. According to Akira Saito, "Buddhapilita in the history of Madhyamika 
philosophy", Transactions of the International Journal of Oriental Studies 
31, 1986, 106-107) these may be taken as an indication that Buddhapilita 
and the author of the Akutobhaya were working from slight variations in 
the text of the Sanskrit kdrikds in each of these five instances. They are 
listed on p. xvii by Saito as the following locations in Buddhapilita’'s 
Madhyamakakarikd-Vrtti: 1.8ab; VII.16ab; VII.17cd; VII. 28; and XI.1lab. 
Several later Tibetan scholars claimed that the Akutobhaya did indeed 
differ from the other commentaries on doctrinal and philosophical issues, 
but such claims do not seem to be entirely justified on the basis of present 
evidence. 

363. This lengthy work is available in "three Chinese translations, two 
Tibetan translations (both from the Chinese, one being merely a partial 
summarization, i.e., a hrdaya of the full-length version), and two modern 
Sanskrit editions largely derived from a relatively recent Nepalese Mss." 
(George Crevoshay, "Some traces of Vedic divinities in the 
Lankavatarasitra" in T.N. Dharmadhikari (ed.), Golden Jubilee Volume, 
Vaidika Samsodhana Mandala (Poona 1982), p. 39). Consult the many 
citations listed in the Bibliography, Volume One of the Encyclopedia of 
Indian Philosophies, Third Edition, #137 (pp. 143-145). 

364. Christian Lindtner, "The Lankavatara...", op. cit., pp. 245 ff. 

365. Schmithausen, Alayavijfidna..., Volume 2, op. cit., note 102 on pp. 
263-264. 

366. Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki, Studies in the Lankavatara Siitra (London 


ENDNOTES 745 


1930, 1957), pp. 4-15. 
367. Suzuki, ibid., pp. 15-37. 

368. Jikido Takasaki, "Analysis of the Lankavatara. In search of its original 
form", Indianism et Bouddisme offerts a Msgr. Etienne Lamotte. Publication 
de l'Institut Orientaliste du Louvain 23 (Louvain-de-Neuve 1980), pp. 339- 
345. 

369. Jikido Takasaki, "Sources of the Lankavatara and its position in 
Mahayana Buddhism", Indological and Buddhist Studies. Volume in Honour 
of Professor J. W. de Jong on his Sixtieth Birthday (Canberra 1982), p. 
S65. 

370. Darbhanga 1963. 

371. Translated by Daisez Teitaro Suzuki, The Lankdvatara Siitra (London 
1932). 

372. Edward Hamlin, "Discourse in the Lankavatadra Sitra", Journal of 
Indian Philosophy 11, 1983, 267-313. 

373. Suzuki, Studies in the Lankdvatdara Sitra, op. cit. 

374. This introductory Chapter is translated in S 65-85 and summarized in 
H 270-275, including translations of one or two passages. Suzuki says it 
“appears in all the Lankdvatara texts except Gunabhadra...(and) is...no 
doubt a later addition" (S 65). 

375. H, p. 270. 

376. Translated and discussed in H, pp. 290-291. 

377. On the classification into eight kinds of vijfiana see H, pp. 279-281, 
as well as Gishin Tokiwa, "Svacittamdatra, the basic standpoint of the 
Lankavatara Sittra", Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 26.1, 1977, 34- 
39. 

378. This section is studied, and excerpts translated, in H, pp. 282-286. 
379. Translated and discussed in H, pp. 288-289. 

380. Translated and discussed in H, p. 291. 

381. Translated and discussed in H, p. 309. 

382. This sentence and the previous one, which relate directly to the 
distinction in question, do not appear in T but are found in E. T on this 
passage is rather confusing, as there is apparently a difference between the 
Chinese and Sanskrit texts at this point. 

383. The text is apparently garbled here; it is unclear what is the eighth 
theory. 

384. Concerning these five see Akira Suganuma, "The five dharmas in the 
Lankavatarasitra", Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 15.2, 1967, 32- 
39. 

385. A goodly number of these verses are translated in S. 

386. This is T. 86. 

387. This is T. 125. 

388. This is T. 155. 


746 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


389. T. 653. 
390. In Chinese, T. 397 (15) and in Tibetan, Toh. 27. Parts of Chapters 17- 
19 are translated into French by Sylvain Levi, "Notes chinoises sur I'Inde, 
IV" in Bulletin de I'Ecole Francaise d'Extreme-Orient 5, 1905S, 262-284. A 
few pages are translated in A.F.R. Hoernle, Manuscript Remains of 
Buddhist Literature found in East Turkestan. Two volumes (Oxford 1916; 
Amsterdam 1970). 
391. T.464-467 and Toh. 109. 
392. T. 657. 
393, T. 982-988. This work is edited by Shuyo Takubo (Tokyo 1972). 
394. T. 454-455 and T. 457. 
395. T. 310 (12), T. 316 and Toh. 56. 
396. T. 1465. 
397. T, 650-652 and Toh. 180. 
398. T. 1137-1140. Edited in H.W. Bailey, Khotanese Buddhist Texts. 
Cambridge Oriental Series 3 (London 1951). Portions edited in G. 
Bongard-Levin, Studies in Ancient India and Central Asia. Soviet Indology 
Series 17 (Calcutta 1971), pp. 247-256. 
399. This work, in Chinese as T. 310 (24) and T. 325-326, in Tibetan as 
Toh. 68, has been translated into French in Pierre Python, 
Vinayaviniscayasittra. Enquete d'Upali pour un Exegése de la Discipline 
(aris 1973), into English in Chang, Treasury, pp. 262-278. 
400. T. 420-421. 
401. T. 1521, available in Chinese only. Opinions differ about whether 
Nagarjuna, the author of the works #s 33-44, is also the author of this 
text. Lindtner (Ndgarjuniana, op. cit., p. 14) thinks "there are several 
reasons to render it likely that it is authentic: The very early Chinese 
evidence; quotations from the Bodhisambhara;...Dasabhiimika-siitra is 
known to have been used by Nagarjuna elsewhere". Ruegg, The Literature 
of the Madhyamaka School..., op. cit., p. 29, note 67, reports that "the 
authorshp of this work has been questioned by A. Hirakawa", but 
confirmed by R. Hikata 

Chapter Nine, which deals with "The Path of Easy Practice" as well 
as with classifications of various and sundry Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, is 
reconstructed into Sanskrit by Hisao Inagaki, "The path of easy practice", 
Ryukokudaigaku Ronsho 422, 1983, 38-55. Inagaki has also translated 
Chapter Five, titled "Retrogression and Non-retrogression", in his "The easy 
method of entering the stage of non-retrogression", The Pacific World n.s. 
3, 1987, pp. 24-28. 
402. Nakamura, op. cit., p. 241. 
403. Edited and translated many times; cf. Potter, Bibliography: Third 
Edition #160.1 for references. 
404. Edward Conze, The Short Prajfiapdramita Texts (London 1974) pp. 


ENDNOTES 747 


142-143. 

405. Probably the most recited, studied and revered of all the 
Prajfiaparamitasiitras, it is usually rendered (improperly, Edward Conze 
argued) as the "Diamond" or better "Diamond-cutter" siitra. Bibliographical 
materials are provided in Potter (ed.), Bibliography: Third Edition.# 161.1. 
406. Conze's edition and translation (Serie Orientalia Roma 13, 1957), pp. 
10-11. 

407. Prabal Kumar Sen, "Srilata: a pre-Vasubandhu philosopher", Journal 
of the Department of Philosophy, University of Calcutta 1, 1983-83, 119- 
131. 

408. J. Przyluski, "Sautrantika et Darstantika", op. cit., 14-24. 

409. Two versions of the same text are extant only in Chinese, constituting 
T. 1505 and T. 1506. The name of the author of T. 1505 is given as Kind- 
hien; its translator as Kumarabuddhi, who made the translation in 382: 
the Chinese of its title is Ssu A-han-mou tch'ao-kiai. As to T. 1506, its 
Chinese name is said to be San-fa-tou louen, it is fifteen pages long; its 
translator is Gautama Samghadeva, who made it in 391. Translations come 
down to us in Sanskrit palmleaf found in Turfan (present-day Xinjiang). 
This information, with the spellings, is provided in Leon Hurvitz, "The road 
to Buddhist salvation as described by Vasubhadra", Journal of the American 
Oriental Series 87, 1967, 434-486. 

Both versions have been translated into English by Eric Grinstead 
in a book, unpublished to our knowledge, scheduled to be titled Buddhism 
by Threes. Grinstead tells us in his Introduction to the forthcoming book 
that "there is a close relation between" T. 1505 "and the later (and much 
larger) (Abhidharma)KoSa". The present summary is prepared by us on the 
basis of a manuscript of Grinstead's translation. An opening Preface in T. 
1505 tells us the date surrounding the preparation of that Chinese 
translation at Ye in Turfan in 382 A.D., and that the entire project of 
translation, of which this is one part of three, took eight years. 

410. Thich Thein Chau, "The literature of the Pudgalavadins", Journal of 
the International Association for Buddhist Studies 7.2, 1984, p. 8, however, 
argues that this is not a Sammitiya text. 

411. T. 1649.32.464a.27. See the comments by K. Venkataramanan in 
Visvabharati Annals 5, 1953, p. 174 and pp. 218-219, note 24. 

412. K. Venkataramanan's English translation of the Chinese text, ibid., 
should be used with considerable caution. Venkataramanan himself admits 
his own tentativeness at several places, and much of his translation makes 
little sense. In his defence, however, the Chinese of this treatise is often 
problematic. The text itself seems occasionally corrupt and the edition 
provided in the Taisho canon is plagued by atrocious punctuation and 
absurd sectional divisions. 

Part of this text is reviewed in N.N. Dutt and K.D. Bajpai, 


748 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


Development of Buddhism in Uttar Pradesh (Lucknow 1956), pp. 302-307. 
413. Discussed in Venkataramanan, "Did the Buddha deny the self?", 
Proceedings of the Indian Philosophical Congress 30, 1955, 221-228. 
414. See discussion in Venkataramanan's translation, op. cit., pp. 219 note 
24, 221-222 note 34. 

415. As Venkataramanan has noted, ibid., p. 223 note 26. 

416. The text of the Sammitiya rebuttal to positions four and five is 
corrupt. This section of the text (465b.10-13) has been wrongly placed 
under the refutation of the fifth proposition, and it is moved here, 
following Venkataramanan's emendation; see Venkataramanan's 
translation, ibid., pp. 178 and 223 note 42. 

417. T. 618. 

418. This is #44 of T. 310 in Chinese, Toh. 88 in Tibetan. It is translated 
in Chang, Treasury, op. cit., pp. 280-311. 

419. See Robinson, Early Madhyamika..., op. cit., pp. 32-33. 

420. Ruegg, op. cit., pp. 27-28. 

421. Lindtner, Nagarjuniana, op. cit., pp. 11-12, footnote 13. 

422. Hsueh-Li Chang, "Nagarjuna's approach to the problem of the 
existence of God", Religious Studies 12, 1976, 207-216. 

423. Visvabharati Annals 6, 1954, 165-231. 

424. Robinson, op. cit., pp. 208-209. 

425. Similar to Madhyamakakarikaés 1.12, 15.4, 1.1-4, according to 
Robinson, ibid., p. 32. 

426. = Madhyamakakarika 1.9, according to Robinson, ibid. 

427. = Siinyatdsaptati 19, according to Robinson, ibid. 

428. = Madhyamakakarikd 13.3 according to Robinson, ibid. 

429. = Madhyamakakarikd 12.1 according to Robinson, ibid. 

430. See Madhyamakakarika 11.2, advises Robinson, ibid. 

431. See Madhyamakakarikds 7.15 and 2.1, advises Robinson, ibid. 

432. Ronald Davidson's unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of 
California at Berkeley 1985, pp. 133-134. 

433. Stefan Anacker, Seven Works of Vasubandhu, the Buddhist 
Psychological Doctor (Delhi 1984), pp. 211-273. 

434. Ronald M. Davidson writes in his as-yet unpublished Ph.D. 
dissertation (Berkeley 1985): "In the MSABh [i.e., the 
Mahdayanasiitralamkdara-Bhdsya ascribed to Vasubandhu]...the name of the 
author of the MSA is given as Vyavadatasamayabodhisattva. Demieville 
has shown that Yogacaras (meditation masters) who were associated with 
the cultus of Maitreya have received the posthumous epithet of 
Bodhisattva. It is entirely likely that this was the case here and 
Vyavadatasamaya was a monk in northern India similarly involved in the 
Maitreya cult. I take Vyavadatasamaya to be the compiler of all the verses 
of the received text and the author of the later ones" (p. 133). 


ENDNOTES 749 


The work is standardly ascribed to Asanga. However, Davidson 
notes that Asaiga "refers to it (the Mahdyanasiitralamkara) in the 
Viniscayasamgrahani [section of the Yogacdrabhiimi] as an example of a 
well-constructed sGstra, but he gives no author's name" (Davidson, ibid., p. 
134). 

435. This simile may "reflect" the difference between the true dharma, 
which is ineffable, and its faint "reflection" which is the words of the 
dharma. 

436. Perhaps the designation "jalpamatra" zather than "vijfiaptimatra” for 
the school would have made its intentions more evident! 

437. IX.11-14 translated in Davidson, ibid.., pp. 263-264. 

438. IX.41-48 are translated in Davidson, ibid., pp. 266-270. 

439. IX.70-75 are translated in Davidson, ibid., pp. 315-318. 

440. XI.15-19 are translated in’Davidson, ibid., p. 232. 

441. XI.39-45 translated in Davidson, ibid., pp. 249-250. 

442. X1X.41-54 translated in Davidson, ibid., pp. 249-250. 

443. Alex Wayman goes into greater detail on this at pp. 25-29 of his 
Analysis of the Sravakabhiimi Manuscript, University of California 
Publications in Classical Philology 17 (Berkeley 1961). 

444. Lambert Schmithausen, Alayavijfiana..., op. cit. 

445. For a critical review of Schmithausen's work cf. the review of it by 
Paul J. Griffiths in Journal of the International Association of Buddhist 
Studies 12.1, 1989, 170-177. A work by a student of Schmithausen, 
unavailable to us at the time of writing, is H.S. Sakume, Die 
Asrayaparivrtti-théorie in der Yogacarabhiimi, Two Volumes (Stuttgart 
1990), reviewed by Eli Franco in Indo-Iranian Journal 36, 1993, pp. 343- 
349, who extends this type of study of the present work to other topics. 
446. Schmithausen, op. cit., pp. 110ff. discusses this passage. 

447. Line 2 of page 23 in Schmithausen, ibid., Volume 2, note 844 on pp. 
429-431. 

448. Sections of this are discussed in various passages and footnotes in 
Schmithausen, ibid. See the references on his p. 668 to various lines in 
this section. 

449. This section is freely translated by Esho Mikogami, "A refutation of 
the Samkhya theory in the Yogac4rabhiimi", Philosophy East and West 19, 
1969, 443-448. 

450. Lines 13-15 of E129 are translated by Schmithausen, op. cit., p. 132. 
The section is restored into Sanskrit by Vidhusekhara Bhattacharya in his 
"Atmavada as in the Yogacarabhiimi of Acarya Asanga", Dr. Kunhan Raja 
Presentation Volume (Madras 1946), pp. 27-37. 

451. This section is translated in George Chemparathy, "Two early 
Buddhist refutations of the existence of isvara as the creator of the 
universe", Wiener Zeitschrift fur die Kunde des Sud- und Ostasien 12-13, 


750 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


1968-69, 129-138. 

452. Schmithausen, Alayavijfiana..., op. cit., p. 135 contains a translation 
of p. 192, lines 6-9 of E192. 

453. Alex Wayman in Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 8.1, 1960, 
pp. 379ff. Reprinted in Alex Wayman, Buddhist Insight (ed. George 
Elder)(Delhi 1984), pp. 327-332. 

454. Schmithausen, op. cit., p. 18. 

455. Schmithausen's translations of technical terms have been replaced by 
the translations standard for the present Volume. 

456. Wayman in Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 8.1, op. cit. 
457. Schmithausen, op. cit., pp. 221-222. 

458. Schmithausen, ibid., p.669. 

459. Wayman, Buddhist Insight, op. cit., p. 354. 

460. Schmithausen, op. cit., footnotes, pp. 228-241. 

461. Schmithausen, ibid., footnotes 1420-1426. 

462. This summation is based on Schmithausen's translation of what he 
calls "a difficult line". See his notes in Schmithausen, ibid., pp. 538-543. 
463. This section has not been translated into Sanskrit so far. 

464. This Chapter is not available in Sanskrit. 

465. Wayman, Analysis of the Sravakabhiimi Manuscript, op. cit. 

466. In Tibetan Sanskrit Works Series 17, 1973. 

467. The last section, on food, is translated in Wayman, Analysis..., p. 139. 
468. This paragraph is taken from Wayman, ibid., p. 86, with replacement 
of his translations of technical terms by ours. 

469. Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 8.1, 1960, pp. 379ff., 
reprinted in Wayman, Buddhist Insight, pp. 327-332. 

470. Nalinaksha Dutt's edition of Bodhisattvabhiimi (Pataliputra 1966, 
1978), pp. 8-46, 

471. Gustav Roth provides an improved Sanskrit text and English 
translation of the first few lines in his "Observations on the first chapter of 
Asahiga's Bodhisattvabhiimi", Indologia Taurinensia 3-4, 1975-76, 403-412. 
472, This Chapter has been translated in Janice Willis, On Knowing 
Reality.The Tattvartha Chapter of Asanga's Bodhisattvabhiimi (New York 
1979). Our summary draws on her translation as well as E and T. 

473. This Chapter is translated into French by Paul Demieville, "Le chapitre 
de la Bodhisattvabhimi sur la perfection du dhyana", Rocznik 
Orientalistyczny 21, 1957, 109-128, reprinted in Paul Demieville, Chois 
d'Etudes bouddhiques (1969-1970)(Leiden 1973), pp. 304-319. 

474. This Chapter is translated into French by Johannes Rahder in Acta 
Orientalia (Copenhagen) 4, 1926, 214-256. 

475. This Chapter is translated into French by Johannes Rahder, ibid. 
476. Schmithausen, op. cit. 

477. Ibid., pp. 194-196. 


ENDNOTES 751 


478. Paul J. Griffiths, On Being Mindless..., op. cit., pp. 130-137. 

479. Lambert Schmithausen, Der Nirvana-Abschnitt in der Viniscaya- 
samgrahani der Yogdcdrabhiimi. Osterreichische Akademie der 
Wissenschaftern. Veroffentlichungen der Kommission fur Sprache und 
Kulturen Sudasiens 8, 1969, pp. 41-71. 

480. Quoted passages are from Davidson's thesis, op.cit., pp. 186-188, 
except that we have substituted the translations of technical terms used in 
this Volume for Davidson's translations. 

481. Davidson, ibid., pp. 205-207. 

482. Alex Wayman, "Nescience and insight according to Asanga's 
Yogacarabhiimi", Buddhist Studies in Honour of Walpola Rahula (ed. S. 
Balasoriya et al.) (London 1980), pp. 251-266. Reprinted in Alex Wayman, 
Buddhist Insight, op. cit., pp. 193-214. 

483. T. 1602 and T. 1603. There is no Tibetan translation. T. 1617 is a 
commentary by Paramartha title *Trinihsvabhavasdstra, which is a 
commentary on the seventh chapter of the present work. Schmithausen, in 
footnote 99 (pp. 261-262) of Part II of his Alayavijfidna (op. cit.) provides 
a wealth of information on the evidence pertaining to it. The work is 
referred to as *PrakarandryasdsanaSastra by Demieville; another suggestion 
of the real title is Sdsanodbhavand, and still others have been suggested. 
Schmithausen gives evidence to show that it is certainly subsequent to the 
Yogacarabhiimi, but probably prior to the "Maitreya" works. 

484. Ronald M. Davidson, Ph.D. dissertation, op. cit., note 28 on p. 147. 
485. Rahul Sankrtyayana, "Second search of Sanskrit palm-leaf mss. in 
Tibet", Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society 33, 1937, 1-57. 
486. P. Pradhan, "Ms. of Asaiga's Abhidharmasamuccaya", Indian Historical 
Quarterly 24, 1948, 87-93. 

487. V.V. Gokhale, "A rare manuscript of Asanga's Abhidharmasamuccaya", 
Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 11, 1948, 207-213. 

488. V.V. Gokhale, "Fragments from the Abhidharmasamuccaya of Asanga", 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland, Bombay 
Branch 23, 1947, 13-38. 

489. As Visva-Bharati Studies 12, 1950. 

490. Walpola Rahula, Le Compendium de la superdoctrine (philosophie) 
(Abhidharma-samuccaya d'Asanga). Bulletin del'Ecole Francaise d'Extreme- 
Orient 78 (Paris 1971). 

491. Walpola Rahula in fact says that he made use of the Tibetan and 
Chinese translations as well as Pradhan's Sanskrit edition/reconstruction 
(p. xx), but there is scant evidence to support this claim (T'oung Pao 1973, 
pp. 339-346, and Lambert Schmithausen's "Zu Walpola Rahula's 
Uberstezung von Asanga's Abhidharma-samuccaya", Wiener Zeitschrift fiir 
die Kunde des Sudasien 20, 1976, pp. 111-122) and must, like the 
edition/reconstruction upon which it is based, be used with extreme care. 


752 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


492. The text has close links with another major work at least parts of 
which may come from Asanga: the 166.Yogdcdrabhiimi. Also, many of its 
definitions are reproduced in Sthiramati's Trimsikabhasya. There is only 
one Indian commentary extant in Sanskrit, the 
Abhidharmasamuccayabhasya. 

493. The Sanskrit here is not quite certain. Pradhan reconstructs abhiita- 
parikalpa 102.2 and makes no comment. This is certainly the usual 
Sanskrit form, but the Tibetan reads yang dag pa ma yin pa'i rnam par rtog 
pa (P137b6/D116bS-6) which should probably be reccnstructed as abhiita- 
vikalpa, less common though this form is. Matters are complicated by the 
fact the the Abhidharmasamuccayabhdsya seems to have read abhiita- 
parikalpa, judging from both the extant Sanskrit (137.8) and the Tibetan 
translation (yang dag pa ma yin pa'i kun tu rtog pa (101b7). It's 
noteworthy that, as far as I can see, the Tibetan translations of both the 
Abhidharmcsamuccaya and the Bhdsya consistently use rmam Par rtog pa 
for vikalpa and kun tu rtog pa for parikalpa elsewhere, which seems to 
strengthen the supposition that the Tibetan translators were reading 
abhita-vikalpa here. Following the lectio difficile, then, I give abhiita- 
vikalpa here, though with’some hesitation. (PG) 

494. Edward Conze, The Prajiiaparamita Literature, op. cit., p. 96. 

495. Edited, with the Vajracchedikaprajfiaparamitasitra, by Lal Mani Joshi 
and Samdhong Rinpoche (Sarnath 1978). 

496. Summary based on Tucci's translation of the Chinese--the Sanskrit is 
missing. 

497. Etienne Lamotte, La Somme du Grand Véhicule. Two volumes 
(Louvain 1938-39). 

498. Lamotte, "L'dlayavijfiana (le réceptacle) dans le Mahayanasamgraha 
Chap. II)", Melanges Chinois et Bouddhiques 3, 1939, 169-255. 

499. Ronald Davidson discusses at some length the evidence for and 
against ascribing this work to Asanga. He notes that the 
Mahaydnasamgraha cites the Mahdyanasitralamkara, the 
Madhyantavibhaga, and the Bodhisattvabhiimi section of the 
Yogacarabhimi, and that this pattern of quoting contrasts noticeably with 
the followed in, e.g., the Yogdcdrabhiimi itself, which does not quote the 
Mahdayanasitralamkara at all and only mentions it once. Davidson points 
out, further, that "many of the categories standard to Asanga's previous 
works have been altered", giving examples. However, he concludes that 
"while it is obvious that there was a model and methodology shift from the 
Yogacarabhiimi and allied works, it is equally obvious that there exists 
some degree of continuity" (Davidson, op. cit., pp. 136-137). 

500. It will be seen below that a number of quoted passages from other 
works attributed to Asanga are identified by the summarizer as "quoted as 
if a work by a different author". Though this may be taken to signify that 


ENDNOTES 753 


the present work is not a work of Asatiga's that is not the only possible 
explanation. Another may be that someone after Asafiga inserted these 
references without recognizing that they were by the same author, or 
through murky language failing to make it clear. Still, we have cited this 
work as the last among those attributable to Asanga as a way of taking 
note of the frequent references of this sort. 

501. The Abhidharmasiitra, which is not extant, and which according to 
some scholars never existed but is an invention of Asanga's! 

502. 1.44-49 is translated in Davidson, ibid. 

503. Contrary to the opinion of Sthiramati expressed in the 
Trimsikabhasya, the storehouse consciousness is conceived by Asanga 
primarily as the cause of affliction. 

504. Name = constructed, notion = dependent. The dependent notion 
arises successive to the name and the name is anterior to any notion. 
505. This section is translated in Noriaki Hakamaya, "The realm of 
enlightenment in vijfiaptimdtrata: the formulation of the four kinds of pure 
dharmas", Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 3.2, 
1980, 21-41. 

506. Leslie S. Kawamura, "The Dharmadharmata-vibhaga, Journal of Indian 
and Buddhist Studies 32.2, 1984, pp. 10-17. 

507. Respectively, these are in D.T. Suzuki's Tibetan Tripitaka, Peking 
Edition (Kyoto/Tokyo 1958), all in Volume 128, No. 5524, pp. 22-24; no. 
5523, 21-22; and no. 5529, 133-138. 

508. Davidson, op. cit., p. 134, comments: "That the DhDhV...was evidently 
unknown to Hsiian-tsang, Dharmapala, or Sthiramati, in no way indicates 
that the DhDhV is not by the same author (i.e. Vasubandhu) as the other 
commentaries on the "Maitreya" texts. In fact, the DhDhV may have been 
deliberately ignored by these writers because it doesn't fit into their 
conception of Yogacara. Not into Sthiramati's, because the existent and the 
nonexistent cannot be differentiated, and not into Dharmapala's and 
Hstian-tsang's, because the primordial nature of vijfidna is denied. The 
original ‘five works of Maitreya’ also included a Yoga-vibhaga, which no 
language has preserved. This may indicate that this text was too radical 
even for the Tibetans! (who were after all at the time under the influence 
of Santaraksita and Kamalasila)." (Anacker, private communication). 
509. Stefan Anacker, "An unraveling of the Dharma-dharmata-vibhaga-vrtti 
of Vasubandhu", Asiatische Studien 46.1, 1992, pp. 26-36. 

510. A portion reconstructed into Sanskrit, together with the Tibetan 
translation of the rest, is provided in Davidson, op. cit., pp. 289-293 and 
footnotes thereon. 

511. Warder, op. cit., p. 407. 

512. Conze, The Prajfiaparamita Literature, op. cit., p. 37. 

513. Warder, op. cit., p. 408. 


754 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


514. Serie Orientale Roma 6, 1954. There are also other summaries than 
ours, by Edward Conze, "Maitreya's Abhisamayadlamkara", Sino-Indian 
Studies 5, 1957, 21-36, and by Warder, Indian Buddhism, op. cit., pp. 407- 
413, and an extended analysis by Ernst Obermiller, Analysis of the 
Abhisamaydlamkdra. Three volumes (London 1933-39, also Calcutta 
Oriental Series 27, 1933-36). See also Conze's discussion in the 
Prajfiaparamita Literature, op. cit., pp. 103-107. Our summary here 
attempts to minimize the complexities, involved in the relationship with 
other texts. 
515. For representative literature cf. Potter, Bibliogrraphy, Third Edition, 
op. cit., under #175.24, 
516. Excerpted from Stefan Anacker, Seven Works of Vasubandhu, Op. cit., 
. 11-23. 
By. The account is slightly different in the Tibetan sources. Cf. Anacker, 
ibid., p. 11. 
518. Edited and translated into French by Louis de la Vallee Poussin. Seven 
volumes (Paris 1923-31). Translation revised by Etienne Lamotte in six 
volumes, Melanges chinois et bouddhiques 16, 1971. This has been 
translated into English by Leo M. Pruden in four volumes (Berkeley, Calif. 
1988-1990). 
519. See Potter, Bibliography, Third Edition, op. cit., #175.1. 
520. Edited, with Yasomitra's Sphutartha, by Dwarikadas Sastri (Varanasi 
1970, 1981) 
521. Sections 25-27 are freely translated in Th. Stcherbatsky, The Central 
Conception Buddhism and the Meaning of the Word Dharma. Royal Asiatic 
Society Publication Fund 7 (Calcutta 1923, 1926; Dellhi 1970), pp. 62-77. 
522. In addition to "T", this section has been translated by Th. Stcherbatsky 
in Soul Theory of the Buddhists, Bulletin de l'Academie des Sciences de 
URSS 1919; reprinted Delhi 1970. 
523. This section is summarized in Padmanabh S. Jaini, "Smrti in the 
Abhidharma literature and the development of Buddhist accounts of 
memory of the past", in Janet Gyatso (ed.), In the Mirror of Memory 
(Albany, N.Y., 1992), pp. 49-51. 
524. Cf. Yoshihito G. Muroji, Vasubandhu's Interpretation des 
Pratityasamutpdda (Wiesbaden 1993) for references to these editions as 
well as to Japanese translations and discussions of portions of the text. 
525. Giuseppe Tucci, "A fragment from the Pratityasamutpada of 
Vasubandhu", Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 1930, pp. 611-623. 
526. Ascribed to Vasubandhu by Bu-Ston. See Marek Mejor, Vasubandhu's 
Abhidharmakosa and the Commentaries preserved in the Tanjur (Stuttgart 
1991), p. 9. The sections of the summary in quotations are from the article 
by K. Timura on this work in Encyclopedia of Buddhism (ed. 
G.P.Malalasekara et al.)(Colombo) 2.1, pp. 21-22. This work was translated 


ENDNOTES 755 


into Chinese by Bodhiruci in ca. 530. It constitutes T. 1524. 

527. Available in Chinese (T. 3987) and Tibetan translation; cf. Mejor, op. 
cit., p. 9. This work is also ascribed to Vasubandhu by Bu-ston; ibid., p. 9, 
528. According to Mejor, ibid., p. 11, this work is ascribed to Vasubandhu 
by Susumu Yamaguchi. 

529. Mejor, ibid., p. 9, says Bu-ston ascribes this commentary to 
Vasubandhu. 

530. The text exists in several Tibetan and Chinese versions. The present 
summary is mace using Peking/Tokyo Tibetan Tripitaka, volume 104, 
pages 34 and 35. 

531. T. 3993, also available in Tibetan. See Mejor, ibid., pp. 9-11. This was 
translated into Chinese by Bodhiruci around 508-511. A general survey of 
the contents of the seventh bhimi is provided by Johannes Rahder, op. cit., 
reprinted from his doctoral dissertation, Leuven 1926. 

532. T. 1533, ascribed by Japanese scholars to Vasubandhu. See 
Nakamura, op.cit., p. 272, notes 32, and Mejor, ibid., p. 10. 

533. T. 4103, also preserved in Tibetan. See Mejor, ibid., p. 9. Mejor also 
reports that this work "shows a_ direct dependence on the 
AbhidharmakoSa", citing A. Schiefner, "Uber Vasubandhu's Gathasamgraha", 
Melanges Asiatiques VIII (1876-1881), pp. 559-593. 

534. Ascribed to Vasubandhu by Bu-ston. Cf. Mejor, ibid., p. 9. 

535. Cited in Mejor's (ibid., p. 11) list of works ascribed to Vasubandhu by 
Susumu Yamaguchi. 

536. T. 1527-1529 and Nanjio 1206-1210 = 2207, 209, ascribed to 
Vasubandhu in Paramartha's Life of Vasubandhu, probably written in ca. 
565. 

537. T. 1511, 1513 and Nanjio 1168 and 1231. Also ascribed to 
Vasubandhu by Bu-ston. Cf. Mejor, ibid., pp. 8-9. 

538. Cf. Nakamura, op. cit., p. 272, note 30. 

539. Mentioned as a work of Vasubandhu's by Paramartha, Life of 
Vasubandhu. 

540. T. 1519-1520 and Nanjio 1232-1233. Cf. Mejor, op. cit., pp. 8-10. 
541. T. 1524, translated around 529 by Bodhiruci. An important text in 
Japan; see Nakamura, op. cit., p. 271, note 28 for references to Japanese 
translations and studies. Paul Williams, Mahayana Buddhism: The 
Doctrinal Foundations (London 1989), Pp. 257, doubts that this is a work 
of Vasubandhu's. 

542. Minoru Kiyota, "Buddhist devotional meditation: a study of the 
Sukhavati-vyihopadega", in Minoru Kiyota (ed.), Mahayana Buddhist 
Meditation: Theory and Practice (Honolulu 1978), pp. 293-323. 

543. There are several commentaries on the karikds on the Vajracchedika 
extant in Chinese and Tibetan. Giusppe Tucci (Minor Buddhist Texts, op. 
cit.) attempts to unravel the question of their authorship without great 


756 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


success. He argues that the work T. 1510 = Tohoku 3816, translated by 
Dharmagupta and summarized above as our #169, is the prose 
commentary that Asanga wrote on his own verses, and that Vasubandhu 
probably wrote the commentary (on that?) translated by Bodhiruci and 
again by I Ching which constitutes T. 1511 and T. 1513 respectively. 
Finally, he gives an analysis of T. 1510, ascribing it (confusingly) to 
Vasubandhu. Frauwallner ascribes a commentary on the Vajra to 
Vasubandhu "the elder". At the moment it is difficult to say much that is 
definitive about all this. 

544. T. 1532 = Nanjio 1193, ascribed to Vasubandhu by Susumu 
Yamaguchi. See Mejor, op. cit., p. 10, note 29. 

545. T. 4061 = Tohoku 649. The alternative reconstruction of the title is 
Hajime Nakamura's, who remarks that it "teaches how to interpret and 
explain the content of a siitra" (Nakamura, op. cit., p. 271). 

546. Erich Frauwallner, "Vasubandhu's Vadavidhi", Wiener Zeitschrift fur 
die Kunde des Sud- und Ostasien 1, 1957, 104-134. 

547. Anacker, Seven Works of Vasubandhu, op. cit., pp. 29-48. 

548. The numbering corresponds to the enumeration of the fragments in 
Frauwallner, "Vasubandhu's Vadavidhi", op. cit. This enumeration is also 
followed in "T". 

549. See Andre Bareau, Les sectes bouddhiques..., op. cit., pp. 180-189. 
550. This section is translated by Brian Galloway, "A Yogacara analysis of 
the mind, . based on the Vijfiana section of Vasubandhu's 
Paficaskandhaprakarana with Gunaprabha's commentary", Journal of the 
International Association of Buddhist Scholars 3.2, 1980, pp. 7-2Q. 

551. French at Melanges chinois et bouddhiques 4, 1935-6, pp. 151-288; 
English from Berkeley, California 1988. 

552. Anacker, Seven Works of Vasubandhu, op. cit., pp. 83-156. 

553. Attention is also drawn to explanatory articles by G. Morichini, "The 
spiritual struggle of Vasubandhu and his Karmasiddhiprakarana", East and 
West 6.1, + 1955, 1-33 and Stefan Anacker, "Vasubandhu's 
Karmasiddhiprakarana and the problem of the highest meditations", 
Philosophy East and West 22, 1972, pp. 247-258. 

554. Cf. Patthdna 1.1.3.365, etc. 

555. Paris 1907, 1911; Darbhanga 1970. 

556. "Steadiness in awareness" is defined as meditational concentration at 
Madhyanta-vibhagabhasya IV, 3. 

557. This is similar to the argument on wood and fire in Abhidharmakosa 
IV, 2-3 and in Karmasiddhi 8. The more one studies the works of 
Vasubandhu, the less likely the theory of two Vasubandhus enunciated by 
Frauwallner appears to be valid. 

558.Again very akin to the passages cited in footnote 554. 

559. In this case Vasubandhu's interpretation actually does violence to the 


ENDNOTES 757 


verse; the verse clearly states that all the stages are unperfected, 
unperfected and perfected, and perfected. 

560. It should be noted that Vasubandhu in this work distinguishes the 
"author", Maitreyanatha, from "the expounder of the text to us and others". 
561. Tokyo 1964. 

562. Seven Works of Vasubandhu, op. cit., pp. 211-273. 

563. We shall follow Nagao's practice and that of the Anacker translation 
in numbering the verses of the Madhyantavibhdga starting with the second 
karika of the text. In reading the present summary as a commentary on the 
summary of 164.Madhydntavibhdga, the commentary numbering thus 
corresponds to the "T" numbering of the earlier summary. 

564. If one simply said "Everything is empty", this would be characterizing 
everything by a single characteristic, which would be a construction of that 
which was not; if one simply says "It is nonempty", that would be denying 
the possibility of emptying out all constructions from the flow. 

565. This term is being used in Asanga's new sense of a witness 
consciousness connected with the illusion of self. 

566. The appearances are false because a self does not exist, and because 
the perceptions appear with divisions which do not exist. 

567. See Abhidharmakosa Il, 23. 

568. See Abhidharmakosa VI, 14-18, and the present work IV, 12b. 

569. Characteristically, there is no "reality" in this work, only realities" 
from different viewpoints. 

570. The example is that of the painter who himself paints the painting of 
a demon, and then becomes frightened by what he has himself painted. 
571. Just as an oil-lamp, as soon as it is lit, causes darkness to disappear, 
just so knowledge can suddenly arise in a consciousness-stream and cause 
all non-knowledge to disappear. Because this knowledge is non- 
discriminatory, it has nothing to do with any effort. So there is not really 
“anything to be done", any practice. 

572. The discrimination arises, for instance, when it is said "The antidotes 
aren't arising the way they should", or "Afflictions have sure been going on 
for a long time!" 

573. The example goes as follows: There may be a house where nobody 
has lit an oil-lamp for a thousand years. And then suddenly somebody 
comes there and lights one. In the same way, there may be affliction-series 
which have lasted thousands of years which disappear in one moment of 
insight. 

574. Etienne Lamotte, La Somme du Grand Véhicule, op. cit. 

575. This statement of Vasubandhu's seems to imply the possibility of 
external stimuli for the sensory consciousness. 

576. The same arguments are found at Karmasiddhi 27. 

577. Similar argument in Karmasiddhi 28, except that there, even the 


758 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


possiblity of a retributional awareness in the usual sense is ruled out. 
578. This Chapter is translated into French in Etienne Lamotte, 
"Lidlayavijfidna...dans le Mahayanasamgraha", op. cit. 

579. This seems to be in contradiction to the comments on II, 24, but it is 
a contradiction frequently met in Yogacara texts--at Madhyantavibhaga- 
bhdsya I, 4 it is said that defilement and purification cannot be denied, but 
in V of the same text it is clearly stated that defilement does not really 
exist. 

580. Krishnanath Chatterjee's translation of Trimsika with Sthiramati's 
Bhdsya, Anviksa 3.1, 1968 - 6, 1972. Reprinted in K.N. Chatterjee, 
Vasubandhu's Vijfiapti-matratda-siddhi (Varanasi 1980), 33-133. 

581. (Paris 1925; reprinted Tokyo, n.d.) 

582. Anacker, Seven Works of Vasubandhu, op. cit., pp. 181-190, 422-423. 
583. These magical beings, Anacker tells us, "are those that arise all at 
once, with all their organs neither lacking nor deficient. They do not have 
to undergo embryonic stages or any other development. Traditionally, 
gods, hell-beings, and the intermediate existences between one full life- 
‘series' and the next (the bardo of...The Tibetan Book of the Dead) are 
considered to be" such beings. (Cf. T, p. 176, footnotes 7-8). 

584. Melanges chinois et bouddhiques 2, 1932-33, pp. 147-161. 

585. Anacker, Seven Works of Vasubandhu, op. cit., pp. 287-298, 464-466. 
586. Cf. Madhydntavibhagabhdsya I, 10-11a. 

587. The store-consciousness of "seeds" of residual impressions is like the 
mantra which makes the magical creation arise, because it is only by 
power of traces that dualities appear to arise. The constructing of dualities 
is like the appearance of the apparitional elephant in the magic show. The 
dualities which are held to are like the elephant, or the belief in the 
elephant's existence. What underlies it, nondual suchness or emptiness, is 
like the wood the magician has before him. 

588. Cf. Madhyantavibhagabhasya I, 6-7. 

589. Visvabharati Annals 2, 1949. 

590. Collett Cox, Disputed Dharmas, op. cit., p. 53. 

591. Ibid., p. 56. 

592. Cox, ibid. 

593. Cox, ibid., p. 54. 

594. Cox,ibid., p. 54. 


GLOSSARY-INDEX 


The following Index attempts to provide a guide to references to names, 
titles and topics. It also indicates which Sanskrit words are likely to be 
translated by which English expressions, and vice-versa. Page references in 
bold face indicate the primary citation of the work. 


abandonment (nirydna, prahdna) - 
307, 308, 

by meditation, see meditation, 

Abhasvara - 169 
gods - 322, 539 

abhava, see absence 

Abhavasamudgata - 186 

Abhayagiri - 21, 27, 246 

AbhayaSastra, see 137. 
Madhyamakakarika- 
Akutobhaya (Pingala) 

abheda, see identity 

Abhidhammapitaka - 192 

abhidhana, see talk 

Abhidharma, Abhidharmika - 7, 16, 
20, 25, 29, 30, 35, 36, 45, 46, 49- 
54, 62, 69, 73, 102, 124, 134, 
187, 206, 243, 247, 264, 275, 
277, 282, 283, 295, 303, 305, 
323, 324, 349, 350, 370, 388, 
391, 397, 409, 421, 423, 426, 
435, 444, 455, 473, 483, 487, 
539, 552,575, 597, 601, 602, 
613, 622, 625, 627, 628, 636, 
638, 644, 651, 655, 706, 718, 
721 

Abhidharmahrdaya (Dharmasri) - 
68, 314 

Abhidharmahrdaya (Upasanta) - 0 


68, 228 
173.Abhidharmakosa (Vasubandhu) 
- 24, 26, 33-41, 62-72, 483, 484, 
485-516, 586, 620-622, 651, 677, 
716, 755-757 
174.Abhidharmakosabhdasya (Vasu- 
bandhu) - 25, 50-53, 349, 516- 
565, 650 
Abhidharmakosa-Sphutartha 
(Yasomitra) - 754 
Abhidharmamrta (Ghosaka) - 68 
Abhidharmapitaka - 601, 627, 628 
207.Abhidharmasamayapra- 
dipika (Samghabhadra) - 716 
168.Abhidharmasamuccaya 
(Asanga) - 434-452, 575, 743, 
751 
Abhidharmasamuccayabhasya_ - 
(Sthiramati) - 27, 434, 752 
abhidheya, see issue debated 
abhijfid, see faculty, higher 
abhildsa, see covetousness 
abhimukti, see readiness 
abhinirhdra, see endeavor 
abhipraya, see intention 
172.Abhisamaydlamkara - 9, 83, 
478-483 
abhiitaparikalpa, see construc- 
tion of what was not 


760 ENCYCLOPEDIA OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHIES 


abhyudaya, see liberation 
ability - 202, 216, 329 
abode (Glaya) - 294, 412 
-consciousness (-vijfidna), see con- 
sciousness, storehouse 
absence (abhdva) - 45, 52, 81, 108, 
115, 116, 122, 126, 130-132, 135- 
139, 142, 154, 156, 157, 191, 
212, 214, 215, 221-228, 298, 
300, 301, 309, 325, 370, 371, 
378, 389, 390, 538, 540, 545, 
588-590, 602, 603, 610-612, 
635, 636, 644-646, 665, 701 
, mutual (anyonya-) - 336 
» posterior (dhvamsa-) - 538 
» prior (prdg-) - 538, 556 
absolute, absolutism 
(paramartha) - 13, 102, 
717, 728 
truth or standpoint, see truth, 
absolute 
abstention - 500 
from killing, see killing, 
abstention from 
access-meditation - 251 
accompanying causal factor, see 
cause, accompanying 
cause, see cause, connected 
» Mental factor (caitasika, caitta), 
see mental associate 
accumulation (sambhdra) - 293, 
458, 581, 582, 587, 666, 678 
for enlightenment (bodhi), see 
enlightenment, accumulation 
for 
of equipment, see equipment, 
path of 
of merit, see merit, accumulation 
of 
A-ch'u-fo-kuo ching - 722 
acintya, see unthinkable 
44.3 Acintyastava (Nagarjuna) - 
181, 183-184 


acismati, see brilliance of a 
Buddha 
acquisition (parigraha) - 188, 350, 
558, 618, 685 
-force (prapti), see possession 
action (karman) - 2-7, 11, 12, 31- 
35, 53, 62, 64, 69-72,101, 102, 
117, 138, 151, 153, 154, 162, 
167-171, 196, 197, 203, 205-208, 
226, 232-235, 238, 257, 260-264, 
271, 272, 279, 282-291, 298, 
305, 309, 316, 320, 336, 337, 
352, 353, 356, 357, 362, 363, 
378, 379, 399, 400, 405, 406, 
427, 428, 449, 498-503, 547-549, 
568, 569, 578, 587, 609, 612, 
619, 641, 665, 666, 689, 690, 
718 
» bad (akugala) - 153, 157, 
168, 173-175, 198-200, 230, 
231, 248, 249, 285-287, 
385, 393, 500-503, 522, 
648 
black/white - 289 
, bodily - 4-6, 12, 117, 153, 173, 
174, 204, 283, 285, 643, 654 
for the sake of others, see 
altruism 
» good (kuSala) - 153, 154, 169, 
170, 173, 176, 206, 231, 246- 
249, 279, 286-291, 350, 
500-502 
» manifest (vijfiapti-), see karma, 
unmanifest 
, Mental, see awareness 
, neutral (avyakrta), see (karmic- 
ally) neutral 
-organ (-indriya) - 677 
» path of - 174, 290, 316 
,» pure or clean (see also clean, 
pure) - 289, 295, 499, 500 
, Tight (samyak-) - 11, 246, 247 
-s in previous births, see 





GLOSSARY-INDEX 


memory of former births 
» unmanifest (avijfiapti-), see 
karma, unmanifest 
, vocal - 5, 6, 12, 117, 153, 174, 
283, 286, 316, 498, 499, 522, 
581, 643, 654 
activated consciousness, see 
consciousness, functioning 
activity, see motion 
actual entity (dravya,  tattva, 
vastu) - 134, 135, 319, 378, 681, 
682 
ddana, see consciousness, 
retributory 
ddarga, see mirror 
adbhutadharma, see marvel 
addiction to morality and vows, 
see adherence to rule and 
ritual 
adept (asaiksa) - 195, 278, 317, 
353, 356, 405, 442-444, 501, 
508, 509, 521, 533, 561, 623, 
669, 677, 678 
adharma,. see demerit 
adherence to rule and ritual 
(Silavrataparamarsa) - 504, 
552, 553, 557, 558, 613 
adhigama - 510 
adhimoksa, see resolution 
adhydtmacintd, see 
contemplation, innner 
adi, see beginning 
adornment - 165, 566 
adultery - 286, 289, 550, 551 
advaita, see nondual 
advantages, ten - 190 
adventitious(ness) - 382, 609 
adverse, see bad 
advesa, see nonhatred 
aesthetic - 164 
affection, see love 
, self- - 400, 639 
afflicted/unafflicted (upaklista/ 


761 


anupaklista) - 376, 377, 612, 
625 

affliction (upaklesa) - 36, 39, 196, 
203, 239, 279, 280, 294, 295, 
305, 306, 308, 309, 311, 312, 
317, 380, 391, 392, 395, 403, 
430, 465, 491, 525, 526, 612, 
618, 622, 624, 625, 639, 645, 
677, 721, 757 

Afghanistan - 22 

afterimage- 250 

agama - 104, 156, 510 
-s, Buddhist, see Pali canon 

agamyagamana, see incest 

age 
= eon, see eon 
-less - 175, 176 
, old (jara), see aging 

agent (kartr) - 100, 106, 117, 
139, 204, 205, 226, 372, 515 

aggregate (skandha) - 25, 35, 40, 
53, 54, 81, 83-87, 100, 102, 107, 
108, 113-117, 120, 134, 150, 
151, 154-156, 159, 160, 170, 
182, 196, 197, 202, 204, 211, 
254, 255, 259, 260, 262, 263, 
274-278, 282, 292, 293, 296, 
302, 303, 307-311, 314, 315, 
321, 324, 326, 334-336, 338, 
340, 344, 352, 355-362, 365, 
394, 405, 410, 418, 435-437, 
440, 455, 480, 487-489, 496,497, 
509-512, 515-519, 523, 531, 537, 
540, 550, 575, 577, 578, 585, 
586, 588, 589, 595, 599, 619, 
628, 652, 653, 655-660, 685, 
686, 690, 691 

aging (jara) - 73, 170, 196, 
198, 282, 293, 348, 406, 
493, 541, 577, 685, 695-699 
of aging - 495, 695 

agitation (auddhatya), see 
excitedness 


